

===== PAGE 1 =====

Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
Full Length Article
Multi-agent SEA: step-wise evidence acquisition for multimodal financial
reasoning
Shuangyan Deng a, Zihao Huang b, Kelvin Du b, Rui Mao b, Jiamou Liu a,
Ciprian Doru Giurca˘ neanu a,∗, Erik Cambria b
a University of Auckland, 38 Princes Street, Auckland, 1010, New Zealand
b Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798, Singapore
a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t
Keywords: Multimodal financial reasoning requires integrating heterogeneous information sources, including textual con-
Multimodal financial reasoning text, visual signals, and domain-specific knowledge. Despite recent advances, multimodal large language models
Multi-agent system (MLLMs) still suffer from perceptual errors and insufficient knowledge, leading to incorrect intermediate ev-
Large language model
idence and, ultimately, unreliable reasoning outcomes. We propose SEA (Step-wise Evidence Acquisition), a
multi-agent framework that models multimodal financial reasoning as an iterative process of task decomposi-
tion, evidence acquisition, and reasoning. The multi-agent SEA introduces a planner agent that decomposes a
complex question into a sequence of subtasks and generates natural-language queries under a unified communi-
cation protocol. These queries are routed to specialized evidence-seeking agents, which retrieve complementary
evidence from visual inputs, textual context, and external financial knowledge. The retrieved information is
accumulated into a dynamically evolving evidence state, enabling the reasoning agent to perform step-wise,
evidence-grounded inference. Extensive experiments on the financial multimodal benchmarks demonstrate that
SEA significantly improves reasoning accuracy and robustness compared to strong baselines. Further analysis
shows that our framework effectively alleviates perception errors and enhances reasoning performance.
1. Introduction converge on a single critical failure: the inability to acquire the correct
intermediate evidence. Consequently, models proceed with reasoning
Recent advancements in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) based on incomplete or irrelevant information, leading to cascading er-
have significantly improved AI systems’ capacity to integrate visual and rors.
textual information [1–3]. These models have demonstrated strong per- In contrast, human expert reasoning follows a distinct, decomposed
formance across a wide range of tasks [4], including visual question pattern [13]. Aligned with information processing theory [14] and
answering [5], and multimodal reasoning [6]. However, their perfor- bounded rationality [15], experts adopt a step-wise strategy to man-
mance on multimodal financial reasoning and question-answering tasks age limited cognitive resources. Rather than simultaneous processing,
remains far from satisfactory [7–9]. Financial problems often require they employ goal-directed attention [16] to identify and extract task-
precise interpretation of numerical information, domain-specific knowl- relevant evidence from heterogeneous sources dynamically. In this
edge, and multi-step reasoning over heterogeneous inputs such as text, framework, each reasoning step determines the specific evidence re-
tables, and financial charts [10,11]. These characteristics pose signifi- quired for the next, making accurate evidence acquisition the bottleneck
cant challenges for current multimodal models. for successful inference. This suggests that financial reasoning perfor-
The latest financial benchmarks, e.g., FinMMR [12], FAMMA [7], mance is limited less by raw logic than by the ability to retrieve precise,
and FinMME [8], find that state-of-the-art MLLMs consistently fail in task-conditioned information during intermediate steps.
reliable financial reasoning. These failures are primarily attributed to This observation raises a fundamental question: Is multimodal finan-
perception errors (misreading charts), context misunderstanding (mis- cial reasoning fundamentally limited by reasoning capability, or by the ability
interpreting constraints), and knowledge insufficiency (lacking domain to acquire accurate and task-relevant evidence during intermediate steps? We
formulas), as illustrated in Fig. 1. While diverse in origin, these issues hypothesize that the primary source of reasoning errors lies in incorrect
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: sden118@aucklanduni.ac.nz (S. Deng), zihao016@e.ntu.edu.sg (Z. Huang), zidong001@e.ntu.edu.sg (K. Du), rui.mao@ntu.edu.sg (R. Mao),
jiamou.liu@auckland.ac.nz (J. Liu), c.giurcaneanu@auckland.ac.nz (C.D. Giurca˘neanu), cambria@ntu.edu.sg (E. Cambria).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2026.104550
Received 3 April 2026; Received in revised form 6 June 2026; Accepted 9 June 2026
Available online 10 June 2026
1566-2535/© 2026 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


===== PAGE 2 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Fig. 1. An illustrative example of financial multimodal reasoning via single MLLM and SEA.
or incomplete intermediate evidence, rather than deficiencies in reason- ducing redundant information, and improving the quality of intermedi-
ing itself. ate evidence.
In this work, we are motivated to propose SEA (Step-wise Evidence We evaluate our proposed multi-agent SEA on three benchmarks:
Acquisition) for multi-agent systems to address the challenge of cascad- FinMR, FAMMA, MMMU-Finance [7,9,17]. The experimental results
ing reasoning failures caused by poor intermediate evidence quality. demonstrate its strong performance over the state-of-the-art baselines,
SEA explicitly models multimodal financial reasoning as a step-wise pro- yielding average gains by 13.68% accuracy. Furthermore, the suggested
cess of evidence acquisition and reasoning. Instead of forcing a single dynamic task decomposition strategy yields 6.14% accuracy gains on
model to process all multimodal inputs in a single pass, SEA decom- average, compared to the static strategy. Finally, the query-based
poses the reasoning process into a sequence of sub-tasks, where each communication mechanism exceeds previous methods, e.g., pipeline-
step identifies and retrieves the specific evidence required for subse- based [18] , controller-based [19], and debate-based [20] mecha-
quent inference. Specifically, a planning agent first decomposes the task nisms, by at least 4.17%, indicating that our query-based methods can
into sub-tasks and determines the information needed at each step. It better align the collaboration between multi-agents, deliver evidence
then generates targeted evidence-seeking queries, which are routed to with higher utilities for the downstream reasoning.
specialized agents responsible for extracting information from different Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
sources, including financial images, textual context, and external finan-
• We propose SEA, a multi-agent framework that explicitly models task
cial knowledge. The retrieved evidence is accumulated in a shared evi-
decomposition, evidence acquisition, and evidence-guided reason-
dence memory and used to guide step-wise reasoning. To support collab-
ing, enabling dynamic integration of visual, textual, and knowledge-
oration among agents, SEA adopts a query-based communication mech-
based information.
anism that enables targeted evidence exchange among agents. Rather
• We introduce a query-based communication mechanism in which
than relying on complex structured protocols, the planner issues con-
agents interact via concise, step-conditioned natural-language
cise natural-language queries, and specialized agents return focused re-
queries, enabling effective and interpretable evidence exchange.
sponses. This design mirrors how human experts solve financial prob-
• Extensive experiments on three multimodal financial reasoning
lems by asking targeted questions to obtain necessary information, re-
benchmarks demonstrate that SEA consistently outperforms strong
2


===== PAGE 3 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
baselines and mitigates perception errors and knowledge insuffi- neural networks to learn halting decisions during reasoning. Related ap-
ciency by improving intermediate evidence quality. proaches include early-exit Transformers [30] and selective attention
mechanisms that dynamically allocate computation resources. Beyond
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews efficiency-driven adaptive models, active feature acquisition has been
related work on financial multimodal reasoning, active information ac- studied under a decision-theoretic framework. Classification with costly
quisition, and multi-agent/tool-augmented reasoning, positioning SEA features was formulated as a reinforcement learning problem, where
within existing studies. Section 3 presents the proposed SEA frame- the agent sequentially decides which features to observe [31]. Simi-
work, including the problem formulation, planner-guided task decom- larly, sequential feature acquisition under uncertainty was proposed to
position, multi-source evidence acquisition, evidence-guided reasoning, balance accuracy and acquisition cost [32]. These methods explicitly
and query-based communication protocol. Section 4 describes the exper- model information cost but focus primarily on tabular or static feature
imental setup, benchmark datasets, and baseline methods used for eval- settings. In vision and multimodal domains, active perception has been
uation. Section 5 reports the main experimental results and provides explored through glimpse-based models [33] and sequential attention
further analyses of dynamic sub-task generation, evidence acquisition mechanisms that learn where to look next [34]. More recently, adap-
quality, agent communication strategies, and remaining error patterns. tive token selection strategies in Transformers [35] dynamically prune
Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses future research di- irrelevant tokens to improve efficiency.
rections. Recent studies on MLLMs also highlight the importance of selectively
using visual information. Visual In-Context Learning improves MLLMs
2. Related work by retrieving visual demonstrations, summarizing images according to
task intent, and composing intent-oriented demonstrations for down-
2.1. Financial multimodal reasoning stream reasoning [36]. This line of work suggests that multimodal rea-
soning benefits from task-relevant visual information selection rather
In the financial sector, characterized by intricate decision-making than indiscriminate visual encoding.
processes, domain-specific expertise, and sophisticated analysis, LLMs However, existing approaches typically optimize for computational
have demonstrated substantial potential in enhancing financial reason- efficiency, or feature cost, or demonstration selection, rather than the
ing and analytical tasks, such as investment decision-making [21] and utilities of structured reasoning. In contrast, our work frames multi-
market sentiment analysis [4,22,23]. Recent evaluations demonstrate modal financial reasoning as a sequential information acquisition pro-
strong performance of LLMs on textual financial reasoning datasets, in- cess in which the model explicitly determines what evidence is needed
cluding TAT-QA [24], and FinQA [10]. However, real-world financial from images, textual context, and an external financial knowledge base,
reasoning rarely relies on a single textual source. Rather, it typically as well as when to stop. Instead of passively encoding all modalities, our
requires the integration of heterogeneous information from multiple system actively controls when and how evidence is retrieved, enabling
sources. demand-driven reasoning.
Generally, financial multimodal reasoning tasks can be categorized
into two types: knowledge-driven reasoning and perception-driven reason- 2.3. Multi-agent and tool-augmented reasoning
ing. Knowledge-driven reasoning [7,9,25] requires MLLMs to lever-
age deep financial expertise, handle advanced financial terminologies, Recent advancements in LLMs have shown that integrating exter-
and interpret nuanced contextual information. In contrast, perception- nal tools or coordinating multiple agents can significantly enhance rea-
driven reasoning [8] mainly assesses visual capabilities, requiring inter- soning capabilities [37,38]. Tool-augmented frameworks such as Re-
pretation of complex financial visual data such as charts, graphs, and ta- Act [37] interleave reasoning and acting, enabling models to query
bles. Despite MLLMs achieving strong performance on multimodal tasks external environments during inference. Similarly, ToolFormer [38]
across many domains [26], their performance on financial multimodal equips language models with the ability to decide when to invoke exter-
benchmarks, such as FinMR [9], FAMMA [7], and FinMME [8], re- nal tools within a generation process. These approaches extend language
mains weak. Knowledge-driven reasoning is limited by weak command models beyond passive text generation, allowing interaction with struc-
of financial expertise and implicit professional conventions. Perception- tured resources such as calculators, search engines, and code execution
driven reasoning is hindered by inaccurate extraction of fine-grained in- environments.
formation from dense charts and tables. As a result, MLLMs often miss Retrieval-augmented reasoning further improves the factuality and
critical knowledge, numerical details, and visual cues needed for correct reliability of complex reasoning by incorporating external knowledge
financial reasoning. into intermediate reasoning steps. For example, RARE extends a mutual
Beyond benchmark-oriented financial reasoning, recent work has reasoning framework with retrieval actions and a retrieval-augmented
also explored LLM agents for financial decision-making, especially factuality scorer to prioritize factually grounded reasoning paths [39].
in trading scenarios. TradingAgents simulates a real-world trading Related studies on multilingual knowledge graphs also demonstrate
firm through multiple specialized agents, including fundamental ana- that structured knowledge, relational semantics, and contextual enrich-
lysts, sentiment analysts, technical analysts, traders, bull and bear re- ment are important for knowledge-intensive reasoning and alignment
searchers, and risk managers [27]. A recent survey further summarizes tasks [40,41]. These studies suggest that external knowledge sources
the architectures, data inputs, backtesting protocols, and challenges of can provide useful semantic and relational evidence for complex rea-
LLM-based financial trading agents [28]. These works demonstrate the soning.
potential of agent-based financial decision systems in the financial do- In parallel, multi-agent reasoning systems decompose complex tasks
main. However, they mainly focus on market trading and portfolio ac- into specialized roles, such as planner, executor, and verifier agents.
tions, whereas our work studies multimodal financial reasoning over Frameworks such as AutoGen [19] and subsequent works [42] coordi-
charts, tables, textual contexts, and domain knowledge. nate multiple LLM-based agents through iterative communication, en-
abling collaborative problem solving across multiple steps. Recent stud-
2.2. Active information acquisition ies have also extended role-specialized collaboration to high-stakes mul-
timodal domains. For instance, MAM decomposes multimodal medical
Sequential information acquisition has been widely studied as a way diagnosis into specialized agents, including a general practitioner, spe-
to reduce unnecessary computation and improve decision efficiency. cialist team, radiologist, medical assistant, and director, demonstrating
Early works in adaptive computation introduced dynamic inference the effectiveness of modular collaboration across text, image, audio, and
mechanisms, such as adaptive computation time [29], which allow video modalities [43]. These systems typically rely on prompt-based
3


===== PAGE 4 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 1
Comparison of representative techniques, including their main ideas, advantages, and limitations.
Technique Representative Works Main Idea Advantages Limitations
Multimodal CoT FinMR [9]; Evaluates models on financial questions Provides realistic benchmarks for Existing MLLMs often suffer from
FAMMA [7]; involving textual context, charts, tables, assessing financial expertise, numerical perception errors, weak domain
FinMME [8]; and domain knowledge. reasoning, and visual understanding. knowledge, and insufficient
FinMMR [12] cross-modal alignment.
LLM-based financial TradingAgents [27]; Uses multiple LLM agents to simulate Demonstrates the potential of Mainly focuses on trading or
agents LLM trading agent financial decision-making workflows role-specialized agents in financial portfolio actions rather than
survey [28] such as market analysis, trading, and decision systems. evidence-grounded multimodal
risk assessment. financial reasoning.
Active information Adaptive computation Dynamically selects features, tokens, or Improves computational efficiency and Usually optimizes efficiency or
acquisition time [29]; active feature visual regions to reduce unnecessary encourages selective information feature cost, rather than
acquisition [31,32]; computation or acquisition cost. processing. task-conditioned evidence utility
active for multi-step reasoning.
perception [33,34];
adaptive token
selection [35]
Visual information Visual In-Context Selects and summarizes task-relevant Shows that selective visual evidence Focuses on demonstration
selection Learning [36] visual demonstrations or visual can improve multimodal reasoning. selection or visual prompting,
information for MLLM reasoning. without explicit step-wise evidence
acquisition.
Tool-augmented ReAct [37]; Enables LLMs to interact with external Extends LLMs beyond passive Tool use is often implicit or loosely
reasoning ToolFormer [38] tools such as search engines, generation and supports external controlled, and may not retrieve
calculators, or code executors. knowledge or computation. the precise evidence needed at
each reasoning step.
Retrieval-augmented RARE [39]; RSA [40]; Incorporates external knowledge, Improves factual grounding and Usually focuses on knowledge
reasoning and AKR [41] retrieval actions, or structured highlights the value of structured retrieval, factuality, or entity
KG-based methods relational semantics into reasoning. knowledge and contextual enrichment. alignment, rather than multimodal
financial evidence acquisition.
Multi-agent reasoning AutoGen [19]; Decomposes complex tasks into Supports modular problem solving and Existing collaboration is often
MAM [43]; role-aware multiple specialized agents that role-specialized reasoning. prompt-driven, static, or
agents [18]; collaborate through predefined roles or debate-oriented, which may
debate-based communication protocols. introduce redundant or misaligned
agents [20] evidence.
SEA (ours) This work Performs step-wise task decomposition, Dynamically retrieves task-relevant Still depends on the quality of
targeted evidence acquisition, and evidence from visual inputs, textual planner-generated queries and
evidence-guided reasoning through context, and financial knowledge, evidence returned by specialized
query-based multi-agent improving reasoning reliability and agents.
communication. interpretability.
role assignment and predefined communication protocols to guide agent defined as
interactions.
Despite their effectiveness, most existing approaches remain largely 𝑋 = (𝐶, 𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑂), (1)
prompt-driven and are designed for general-purpose reasoning, trad-
where 𝐶 denotes the textual context (e.g., the context of a question),
ing decisions, retrieval-augmented knowledge reasoning, or domain-
𝐼 = {𝑖 , … , 𝑖 } denotes the set of visual inputs (e.g., charts, tables, or
specific diagnosis. They do not explicitly address the challenges of mul-
figure
1
s), 𝑄 i
𝑆
s the question, and 𝑂 = {𝑜 , … , 𝑜 } is the set of candidate
timodal financial reasoning, where accurate evidence acquisition from
answers (options). The ground-truth an
1
swer i
𝑀
s 𝑌 ∗ ∈ 𝑂.
heterogeneous sources, including textual context, tables, charts, and fi-
Unlike conventional single-pass prediction, we model reasoning as
nancial knowledge, is critical. Moreover, existing frameworks often lack
an iterative process that alternates between planning, evidence acquisi-
mechanisms for targeted information seeking, leading to redundant or
tion, and evidence-guided reasoning. At reasoning step 𝑛, the system main-
misaligned evidence that propagates errors in downstream reasoning.
tains: an evidence state 𝐸 , which stores all retrieved evidence up to step
In contrast, our approach introduces a structured framework for ev-
𝑛; and a reasoning trajecto
𝑛
ry 𝑅 , which stores all intermediate reasoning
idence acquisition tailored to multimodal financial reasoning. Rather
outputs up to step 𝑛. Formally,
𝑛
than relying on implicit tool usage, static demonstrations, retrieval
alone, or loosely coordinated agent interactions, we design a simple yet 𝐸 = {𝑒 , … , 𝑒 }, 𝑅 = {𝑟 , … , 𝑟 }. (2)
𝑛 1 |𝐸𝑛| 𝑛 1 𝑛
effective communication protocol that enables agents to exchange con-
cise, task-driven queries and responses iteratively. By focusing on tar- The process starts from empty memory: 𝐸 0 = ∅, 𝑅 0 = ∅.
geted information acquisition and agent communication, our framework The goal is to predict the final answer 𝑌̂ ∈ 𝑂 by progressively col-
improves both the relevance of evidence and the reliability of down-
lecting task-relevant evidence and conditioning each reasoning step on
stream reasoning without requiring additional model training. Table 1 the accumulated evidence. This formulation explicitly separates what
provides a comparison of representative techniques we discussed, in- information is needed from how the answer is inferred, thereby reducing
cluding their main ideas, advantages, and limitations.
hallucination and improving interpretability. For clarity, the main nota-
tions used in the subsequent formulation and analysis are summarized
in Table A.8 in Appendix A.
3. Methodology
3.2. Overview of SEA
3.1. Problem formulation
SEA (Step-wise Evidence Acquisition) is a multi-agent framework
We study multimodal financial reasoning as a sequential evidence- that solves multimodal financial reasoning through a closed-loop inter-
grounded decision problem over heterogeneous inputs. Each instance is action among three functional modules:
4


===== PAGE 5 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Fig. 2. Overview of SEA, a multi-agent framework for step-wise evidence acquisition. The planner generates sub-task-conditioned queries under a unified commu-
nication protocol, which are routed to multi-source evidence agents (image, text, and knowledge). Retrieved evidence is accumulated into a shared evidence state
and used by the reasoning agent for step-wise inference. The entire process forms a closed-loop interaction that tightly couples planning, evidence acquisition, and
reasoning.
1. a planner agent  that decomposes the problem into step-wise sub- sufficient to answer the original question 𝑄:
𝑃
tasks and issues evidence-seeking queries;
{
2. a set of evidence-seeking agents { 𝐼 ,  𝐶 ,  𝐾 } that retrieve evidence 𝑠 = stop, if  𝑃 judges that (𝐸 𝑛−1 , 𝑅 𝑛−1 ) is sufficient for 𝑄,
from visual inputs, textual context, and external financial knowl- 𝑛 continue, otherwise.
edge, respectively;
(4)
3. a reasoning agent  that produces intermediate reasoning condi-
𝑅
tioned on the retrieved evidence including report issues of sufficient This formulation makes the planner adaptive rather than static. In-
evidence. stead of committing to a fixed chain of sub-tasks in advance, the planner
revises subsequent reasoning goals according to the evidence accumu-
As illustrated in Fig. 2, SEA proceeds iteratively. At each step, the lated so far. Such adaptive decomposition is particularly important in fi-
planner determines the current sub-task, formulates a set of targeted nancial reasoning, where relevant information is often distributed across
natural-language queries, and decides whether the current evidence is text, tables, charts, and external knowledge. The complete planner-agent
sufficient to stop. The queries are routed to the appropriate evidence- prompt design is provided in Appendix B.1.
seeking agents, whose outputs are integrated into the shared evidence
state. The reasoning agent then updates the reasoning trajectory based 3.4. Multi-source evidence acquisition
on the current sub-task and accumulated evidence. The process repeats
until the planner determines that the available evidence is sufficient to Given the query set 𝑞
𝑛
= {𝑞
𝑛,1
, … , 𝑞
𝑛,𝐿𝑛
} generated at step 𝑛, each
answer the original question. query is routed to the most appropriate evidence-seeking agent:
This design explicitly treats multimodal financial reasoning as a pro-
𝑎 = 𝜌(𝑞 ), 𝑎 ∈ { ,  ,  }, (5)
cess of demand-driven evidence acquisition: the system does not attempt 𝑛,𝓁 𝑛,𝓁 𝑛,𝓁 𝐼 𝐶 𝐾
to process all information uniformly at once, but instead retrieves the where 𝜌(⋅) denotes the routing function. The corresponding evidence is
specific evidence required by the current reasoning step. then retrieved as
⎧
𝐼
(𝐼, 𝑞
𝑛,𝓁
), if 𝑎
𝑛,𝓁
= 
𝐼
,
3.3. Planner-guided task decomposition 𝑒 𝑛,𝓁 = ⎪ ⎨  𝐶 (𝐶, 𝑞 𝑛,𝓁 ), if 𝑎 𝑛,𝓁 =  𝐶 , (6)
⎪ (, 𝑞 ), if 𝑎 =  ,
⎩ 𝐾 𝑛,𝓁 𝑛,𝓁 𝐾
The planner agent  controls the overall reasoning process. At step
𝑃 where  denotes the external financial knowledge base. The evidence
𝑛, given the input instance 𝑋, the previous evidence state 𝐸 , and
𝑛−1 returned at step 𝑛 is collected into
the previous reasoning trajectory 𝑅 , the planner outputs a sub-task
𝑛−1
𝑡 describing the current reasoning objective; a set of natural-language 𝑒 = {𝑒 , … , 𝑒 }, (7)
𝑛 𝑛 𝑛,1 𝑛,𝐿𝑛
queries 𝑞 = {𝑞 , … , 𝑞 } for evidence acquisition; and a termination
𝑛 𝑛,1 𝑛,𝐿𝑛 and the evidence state is updated by
flag 𝑠 ∈ {continue, stop}. Formally,
𝑛
𝐸 = 𝐸 ∪ 𝑒 . (8)
(𝑡 , 𝑞 , 𝑠 ) =  (𝑋, 𝐸 , 𝑅 ). (3) 𝑛 𝑛−1 𝑛
𝑛 𝑛 𝑛 𝑃 𝑛−1 𝑛−1 The three evidence-seeking agents serve complementary roles. Im-
The sub-task 𝑡 specifies the information needed to advance the rea- age agent  extracts structured visual evidence such as values, trends,
𝑛 𝐼
soning process, such as extracting a numerical quantity from a chart, and relations from charts, tables, and figures. Context agent  iden-
𝐶
identifying a constraint from the context, or retrieving a domain for- tifies task-relevant information from the textual context, including vari-
mula. The query set 𝑞 operationalizes this sub-task into concrete infor- ables, assumptions, and problem constraints. Knowledge agent  re-
𝑛 𝐾
mation requests that can be answered by specialized agents. The termi- trieves financial concepts, formulas, and domain-specific principles from
nation flag 𝑠 indicates whether the current evidence state is already the external knowledge base .
𝑛
5


===== PAGE 6 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 2 This design ensures that the final decision is grounded in an explicit
Statistics of the constructed financial knowledge evidence trail rather than implicit latent reasoning alone. Each reason-
database , including knowledge types and topic ing step is therefore traceable to retrieved evidence, improving robust-
diversity.
ness and interpretability. The implementation details of the reasoning
Number Ratio agent are provided in Appendix B.3.
Database Size 8440 –
Knowledge Type 3.6. Query-based communication protocol
Financial Concept 5698 67.51%
Math Formula 2742 32.49% SEA uses an effective query-based communication protocol to co-
Topic Diversity ordinate agents. Instead of relying on complex symbolic message pass-
Investment 1063 12.60% ing or open-ended multi-agent debate, the planner communicates with
Quantitative Methods 819 9.70% evidence-seeking agents through concise natural-language queries. This
Valuation and Risk Models 785 9.30%
Financial Markets and Products 776 9.20%
design has two advantages. First, it aligns naturally with the capabil-
Financial Reporting and Analysis 701 8.30% ities of modern LLM/MLLM agents. Second, it constrains information
Portfolio Management 684 8.10% exchange to the evidence required by the current sub-task, reducing re-
Fixed Income 658 7.80% dundancy and improving alignment between planning and retrieval.
Credit Risk 456 5.40%
The protocol operates as follows. At each step, the planner first de-
Foundation of Risk Management 447 5.30%
Economics 414 4.90% cides whether reasoning should continue. If 𝑠 𝑛 = stop, the system ter-
Operational Risk 346 4.10% minates evidence acquisition and produces the final answer using the
Derivatives 338 4.00% accumulated evidence and reasoning history. Otherwise, the planner
Market Risk 329 3.90% generates a query set 𝑞 , each query is routed to a specialized evidence-
Corporate Finance 329 3.90% 𝑛
Liquidity and Treasury Risk 295 3.50%
seeking agent, and the returned evidence is added to the shared memory
for downstream reasoning. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete SEA
procedure.
A key property of SEA is that evidence acquisition is step-conditioned.
The system does not passively summarize all available inputs at once. Algorithm 1 SEA: step-wise evidence acquisition for multimodal finan-
Rather, it retrieves evidence only when demanded by the current sub- cial reasoning.
task. This improves both the relevance and the precision of interme- Require: Input instance 𝑋 = (𝐶, 𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑂), knowledge base , maximum
diate evidence, which is essential for reliable multi-step financial rea- number of steps 𝑁
max
soning. We provide the complete prompts used by the three evidence- Ensure: Predicted answer 𝑌̂
seeking agents in Appendix B.2. These prompts specify how the Im- 1: Initialize evidence state 𝐸 ← ∅
0
age Agent, Context Agent, and Knowledge Agent respond to planner- 2: Initialize reasoning trajectory 𝑅 ← ∅
0
generated queries by extracting visual evidence from 𝐼, textual evidence 3: for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑁 do
max
from 𝐶, and financial knowledge from , respectively. 4: (𝑡 , 𝑞 , 𝑠 ) ←  (𝑋, 𝐸 , 𝑅 )
𝑛 𝑛 𝑛 𝑃 𝑛−1 𝑛−1
5: if 𝑠 = stop then
𝑛
Financial knowledge base. To alleviate the domain-knowledge limita- 6: 𝑌̂ ← final(𝑋, 𝐸 , 𝑅 )
tions of general-purpose MLLMs, we construct an external financial 7: return 𝑃 𝑌̂ 𝑛−1 𝑛−1
knowledge base  from the training sets of FinMR and FAMMA. Specifi- 8: end if
cally, we extract answer explanations, which often contain financial con- 9: 𝑒 ← ∅
cepts, formulas, and reasoning procedures, and use an LLM to identify 10: fo 𝑛 r each query 𝑞 ∈ 𝑞 do
key terms together with their definitions and mathematical expressions 11: 𝑎 ← 𝜌(𝑞 ) 𝑛,𝓁 𝑛
across 15 financial topics. The resulting database provides structured 12: if 𝑛 , 𝑎 𝓁 =  𝑛,𝓁 then
domain knowledge that supports downstream evidence retrieval. The 13: 𝑒 𝑛,𝓁 ←  𝐼 (𝐼, 𝑞 )
statistics of  are reported in Table 2. 14: else 𝑛, 𝓁 if 𝑎 𝐼 =  𝑛 ,𝓁 then
𝑛,𝓁 𝐶
15: 𝑒 ←  (𝐶, 𝑞 )
𝑛,𝓁 𝐶 𝑛,𝓁
3.5. Evidence-guided reasoning 16: else if 𝑎 =  then
𝑛,𝓁 𝐾
17: 𝑒 ←  (, 𝑞 )
After updating the evidence state, the reasoning agent 
𝑅
performs
18: end
𝑛 ,𝓁
if
𝐾 𝑛,𝓁
the current inference step. At step 𝑛, it takes as input the sub-task 𝑡 𝑛 , the 19: 𝑒 ← 𝑒 ∪ {𝑒 }
updated evidence state 𝐸 𝑛 , and the previous reasoning trajectory 𝑅 𝑛−1 , 20: end 𝑛 for 𝑛 𝑛,𝓁
and produces an intermediate reasoning output 𝑟 𝑛 : 21: 𝐸 ← 𝐸 ∪ 𝑒
𝑛 𝑛−1 𝑛
𝑟 𝑛 =  𝑅 (𝑡 𝑛 , 𝐸 𝑛 , 𝑅 𝑛−1 ). (9) 22: 𝑟 𝑛 ←  𝑅 (𝑡 𝑛 , 𝐸 𝑛 , 𝑅 𝑛−1 )
23: 𝑅 ← 𝑅 ∪ {𝑟 }
The reasoning trajectory is then updated as
24: end
𝑛
for
𝑛−1 𝑛
𝑅 𝑛 = 𝑅 𝑛−1 ∪ {𝑟 𝑛 }. (10) 25: 𝑌̂ ← fi 𝑃 nal(𝑋, 𝐸 𝑁max , 𝑅 𝑁max )
26: return 𝑌̂
The interaction between evidence acquisition and reasoning is
tightly coupled. If the currently accumulated evidence is insufficient
(i.e., the reasoning agent reports issues as a reasoning step), the planner
generates a new sub-task and additional queries at the next step. If the 4. Experiment
planner determines that the evidence is sufficient, the iterative process
terminates and the final answer is produced: 4.1. Experimental setup
𝑌̂ = final(𝑋, 𝐸 , 𝑅 ), (11)
𝑃 𝑁 𝑁 Our framework instantiates agents based on three frontier models:
where 𝑁 is the final reasoning step satisfying 𝑠 = stop. GPT-4o [1], Gemini-2.5-Flash [2], and Claude-4-5-Sonnet [3]. For each
𝑁
6


===== PAGE 7 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 3
Statistics and characteristics of the evaluation datasets, including test set size, task-type distribution, main image types, knowledge level, and reasoning requirements.
Dataset Test Size Math Expertise Main Image Type Knowledge Knowledge Numerical Advanced
Level Intensive? Math? Math?
FinMR 640 242 (37.8%) 398 (62.2%) Charts, tables, College Yes Yes Yes
diagrams, time
series, maps
FAMMA 200 100 (50.0%) 100 (50.0%) Charts, tables, College Yes Yes Yes
diagrams
MMMU-Finance 1100 1100 (100.0%) – Tables College Yes Yes No
experiment, all agents are instantiated using the same backbone model FAMMA [7] is a multilingual financial multimodal reasoning bench-
to ensure a fair comparison across different model families. To improve mark designed to assess college-level and advanced financial expertise.
reproducibility and reduce randomness in multi-step reasoning, we use The original benchmark contains financial question-answer pairs col-
deterministic decoding for all agents, with the temperature set to 0.0. lected from textbooks and exams, spanning multiple finance subfields
Each agent is prompted to return structured JSON outputs, including the such as corporate finance, asset management, and financial engineer-
planner’s stopping decision, subtask, target agent, and evidence-seeking ing. Each question is paired with one or more images, such as tables,
queries. The full prompt templates for all agents are provided in Ap- charts, and diagrams, requiring models to combine textual understand-
pendix B. ing, visual evidence extraction, and financial knowledge. Compared
To address the domain knowledge limitations of general-purpose with FinMR, FAMMA emphasizes multilinguality and academic finan-
MLLMs, we further construct an external financial knowledge base  cial knowledge. In our evaluation subset, FAMMA is evenly divided into
using expert-annotated explanatory data. See more details of the finan- mathematical reasoning and expertise-oriented questions, allowing us
cial knowledge base in Section 3.4. These human-annotated resources to test whether SEA is effective across both quantitative and conceptual
provide detailed explanations of financial concepts, formulas, and ap- financial reasoning.
plication scenarios, and therefore serve as a high-quality repository of MMMU-Finance [17] is a finance-focused subset of the Multi-
external financial expertise. The knowledge agent retrieves relevant fi- discipline Multimodal Understanding benchmark. MMMU is designed
nancial concepts, formulas, and domain-specific rules from this database to evaluate college-level multimodal understanding and deliberate rea-
according to the query generated by the planner. soning across a wide range of academic disciplines. We use the finance-
To keep the overall reasoning process computationally tractable and related subset, which contains samples drawn from Finance, Economics,
to avoid unnecessarily long planning chains, we set the maximum num- and Accounting1 Unlike FinMR and FAMMA, which are specifically con-
ber of planning steps to 𝑁 = 6. At each step, the planner generates at structed for financial multimodal reasoning, MMMU-Finance provides a
max
most three evidence-seeking queries, corresponding to the image agent, broader academic setting with more standardized exam-style questions.
context agent, and knowledge agent. Therefore, the maximum number Notably, approximately 95% of the visual inputs in this subset are finan-
of agent invocations for one sample is bounded by 1 + 𝑁 (1 + 3 + 1), cial tables, making it especially useful for evaluating table-based numer-
max
where the three terms inside the parentheses correspond to one plan- ical reasoning and structured financial information extraction.
ner call, up to three evidence-agent calls, and one reasoning-agent call Overall, the three benchmarks provide complementary evaluation
at each step, and the additional call denotes the final answer genera- settings. FinMR tests expert-level financial reasoning with rich textual
tion. In practice, the reasoning process may terminate earlier once the and visual evidence; FAMMA evaluates multilingual and college-level
planner determines that the accumulated evidence is sufficient. financial reasoning across heterogeneous visual inputs; and MMMU-
Finance examines broader academic finance reasoning, with a strong
emphasis on table-based visual evidence. Therefore, evaluating SEA on
4.2. Benchmarks these datasets allows us to assess its generalization across different levels
of difficulty, evidence sources, and financial reasoning types.
We evaluate the proposed method on three financial multimodal
reasoning benchmarks: FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance. These
4.3. Baselines
benchmarks are selected because they differ in domain scope, ques-
tion type, evidence dependency, and difficulty level, thereby allowing
The following baseline methods are compared in our experiments:
us to evaluate whether SEA generalizes across different financial rea-
CoT [44] is a method that instructs LLMs to generate intermediate rea-
soning scenarios. To prevent knowledge leakage, all experiments are
soning steps (i.e., Let’s think step by step) before producing the final an-
conducted on the test sets only, since the training sets of FinMR and
swer. It serves as a strong single-agent baseline by improving reasoning
FAMMA are used to construct the external financial knowledge base.
transparency and decomposing complex financial problems into sequen-
Table 3 summarizes the statistics and characteristics of the three testing
tial inference steps.
datasets.
MAD [45] studies the impact of decision-making protocols in multi-
FinMR [9] is an expert-level financial multimodal reasoning bench- agent debate systems. Multiple agents first generate candidate solutions
mark consisting of 3200 financial reasoning questions. Each instance
and exchange reasoning through several discussion rounds. A prede-
includes detailed textual context, one or more financial images, can-
fined decision protocol, such as voting or consensus, is then applied to
didate options, and expert-annotated explanations. FinMR is designed
determine the final answer.
to evaluate professional-level financial reasoning, covering diverse fi-
RAA [18] is a role-aware multi-agent framework for financial question
nancial topics and requiring the integration of mathematical reasoning,
answering, comprising an Evidence Retriever, a CoT-based Generator,
domain knowledge, and visual interpretation. In our evaluation subset,
and an Expert Reviewer. The retriever gathers financial knowledge, the
FinMR contains both mathematical reasoning questions and financial ex-
generator produces an initial answer, and the reviewer refines it through
pertise questions. The mathematical subset mainly requires numerical
critique and correction.
calculation, formula application, and quantitative comparison, while the
expertise subset focuses more on conceptual understanding, financial in-
terpretation, and domain-specific judgment. This makes FinMR the most 1 Economics and Accounting are closely related subfields within the broader
knowledge-intensive and expert-oriented benchmark in our evaluation. financial domain and frequently appear in financial reasoning tasks.
7


===== PAGE 8 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 4
Performance comparison across three financial multimodal reasoning benchmarks: FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance. Results are reported as accuracy (%).
Math and Expertise denote subsets requiring quantitative reasoning and domain-specific financial knowledge, respectively. Numbers in parentheses indicate the
absolute improvement over the CoT baseline. Bold indicates the best result in each column.
FinMR(Acc%) FAMMA(Acc%) MMMU-Finance(Acc%)
Model Method
ALL Math(37.8%) Expertise(62.2%) ALL Math(50%) Expertise(50%) Math
CoT 54.17 49.40 57.07 54.50 53.00 56.00 62.77
GPT-4o
MAD 58.31 (↑4.14) 54.39 (↑4.99) 60.70 (↑3.63) 58.5 (↑4.00) 58.00 (↑5.00) 59.00 (↑3.00) 67.00 (↑4.23)
RAA 59.17 (↑5.00) 53.21 (↑3.81) 62.79 (↑5.72) 60.00 (↑5.50) 59.00 (↑6.00) 61.00 (↑5.00) 69.00 (↑6.23)
SEA(ours) 62.37 (↑8.23) 56.62 (↑7.22) 65.85 (↑8.78) 63.00 (↑8.50) 61.00 (↑8.00) 65.00 (↑9.00) 74.00 (↑11.23)
CoT 61.20 56.79 63.88 61 58.00 64.00 63.77
Gemini-2.5-Flash
MAD 66.19 (↑4.99) 59.79 (↑3.11) 70.01 (↑6.13) 63.00 (↑2.00) 59.00 (↑1.00) 67.00 (↑3.00) 69.44 (↑5.67)
RAA 69.42 (↑7.22) 62.44 (↑5.65) 72.06 (↑8.18) 64.50 (↑3.50) 60.00 (↑2.00) 62.00 (↑5.00) 71.23 (↑7.46)
SEA(ours) 74.80 (↑13.60) 66.20 (↑9.41) 80.00 (↑16.12) 69.10 (↑8.10) 65.00 (↑7.00) 73.20 (↑9.20) 79.00 (↑15.23)
CoT 60.89 58.59 62.28 60.00 59.00 61.00 63.78
Claude-4-5-Sonnet
MAD 74.46 (↑13.58) 72.31 (↑13.72) 75.77 (↑13.49) 61.00 (↑1.00) 60.00 (↑1.00) 62.00 (↑1.00) 73.55 (↑9.77)
RAA 71.49 (↑10.61) 70.11 (↑11.52) 72.33 (↑10.05) 61.00 (↑1.00) 59.00 (-) 63.00 (↑2.00) 78.00 (↑14.22)
SEA(ours) 78.49 (↑17.61) 76.50 (↑17.91) 79.70 (↑17.42) 64.50 (↑4.5) 63.00 (↑4.00) 66.00 (↑5.00) 82.70 (↑18.92)
5. Results Another important observation is that SEA consistently improves
performance across all evaluated base models, including GPT-4o,
In this section, we evaluate SEA from multiple perspectives to under- Gemini-2.5-Flash, and Claude-4-5-Sonnet. Despite the large differences
stand both its overall effectiveness and the sources of its performance in model architectures and capabilities, the proposed framework yields
gains. We first compare SEA with representative baselines on three fi- stable gains across FinMR, FinMMA, and MMMU. This result indicates
nancial multimodal reasoning benchmarks (Section 5.1), and then pro- that SEA is model-agnostic and can serve as a general framework for
vide a series of analyses to examine the contribution of its key de- enhancing multimodal reasoning in financial tasks.
sign choices (Section 5.2), dynamic sub-task generation (Section 5.3), To further assess the reliability of the observed improvements, we
evidence acquisition quality (Section 5.4), agent communication (Sec- conduct a non-parametric statistical significance analysis based on the
tion 5.5), and remaining error patterns (Section 5.6). accuracy scores reported in Table 4. Since the compared methods are
evaluated under the same model–dataset–subset setting and the normal-
ity assumption may not hold for accuracy scores, we use non-parametric
5.1. Overall results
tests in Table 5. Specifically, each model–dataset–subset combination is
treated as one evaluation setting, resulting in 21 paired observations
Table 4 reports the performance comparison of different reason- for each method. We first apply the Friedman test to compare whether
ing strategies across three multimodal financial reasoning benchmarks: there exist overall performance differences among CoT, MAD, RAA,
FinMR, FinMMA, and MMMU-Finance. Overall, our proposed SEA and SEA. The Friedman test indicates a significant difference among
method consistently achieves the best performance across all models and the compared methods, 𝜒2 (3) = 55.23, 𝑝 = 6.14 × 10−12, with the signif-
𝐹
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of demand-driven evidence ac- icance level 𝛼 = 0.05.
quisition for multimodal financial reasoning. We further compare the average ranks of the methods. SEA obtains
Across all benchmarks, SEA significantly outperforms the standard the best average rank of 1.00, followed by RAA (2.38), MAD (2.69),
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) baseline. For example, on the FinMR bench- and CoT (3.93). The Nemenyi post-hoc test shows that the rank differ-
mark, SEA improves the overall accuracy from 54.17% to 62.37% for ences between SEA and the baseline methods are larger than the critical
GPT-4o, from 61.20% to 74.80% for Gemini-2.5-Flash, and from 60.89% difference at 𝛼 = 0.05, indicating that SEA performs significantly better
to 78.49% for Claude-4-5-Sonnet. Notably, the improvement for Claude- than the compared baselines across evaluation settings. In addition, we
4-5-Sonnet exceeds 17 percentage points, indicating that the proposed perform two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests to further confirm the im-
framework can substantially enhance the reasoning capability of strong provements of SEA over CoT (𝑝 = 9.54 × 10−7); MAD (𝑝 = 5.94 × 10−5);
base models. and RAA (𝑝 = 5.93 × 10−5). These results suggest that the performance
Compared with existing multi-agent reasoning methods such as gains of SEA are statistically significant under the model–dataset–subset
MAD and RAA, SEA achieves consistently higher performance across setting rather than being driven by isolated cases.
all benchmarks. While MAD relies on multi-agent debate and RAA in- Overall, the results demonstrate that explicitly separating informa-
troduces role-aware reasoning agents, both approaches still process in- tion acquisition from reasoning is crucial for solving complex multimodal
formation from a static input context. In contrast, SEA explicitly models financial problems. By dynamically retrieving task-relevant evidence be-
evidence acquisition as a decision process, enabling the system to dynam- fore reasoning, SEA significantly improves both reasoning accuracy and
ically retrieve task-relevant information from different sources before robustness compared with existing prompting-based and multi-agent ap-
performing reasoning. This design leads to more reliable intermediate proaches.
reasoning steps and reduces error propagation during multi-step reason-
ing.
The improvement of SEA is particularly pronounced on the mathe- 5.2. Ablation study
matical problems of the three benchmarks, which require precise nu-
merical reasoning and formula application. For example, on the FinMR To quantify the contribution of each component in SEA, we con-
Math subset, SEA achieves 66.20% accuracy with Gemini-2.5-Flash and duct ablation studies by systematically removing key modules from the
76.50% with Claude-4-5-Sonnet, substantially outperforming other rea- full framework. Since the full SEA system built on Claude-4-5-Sonnet
soning strategies. This suggests that dynamically retrieving relevant for- achieves the strongest overall performance in Table 4, we use this model
mulas and financial concepts helps mitigate calculation errors and im- as the base for all ablation experiments. These analyses are intended to
proves reasoning reliability. examine how visual grounding, multi-agent communication, and spe-
8


===== PAGE 9 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 5
Statistical significance analysis across 21 model–dataset–subset evaluation settings. The
significance level is set to 𝛼 = 0.05.
Statistical Test Comparison Result
Friedman test CoT vs. MAD vs. RAA vs. SEA 𝜒2 (3) = 55.23, 𝑝 = 6.14 × 10−12
𝐹
Friedman average rank SEA / RAA / MAD / CoT 1.00 / 2.38 / 2.69 / 3.93
Nemenyi post-hoc test SEA vs. all baselines Significant at 𝛼 = 0.05
Wilcoxon signed-rank test SEA vs. CoT 𝑝 = 9.54 × 10−7
Wilcoxon signed-rank test SEA vs. MAD 𝑝 = 5.94 × 10−5
Wilcoxon signed-rank test SEA vs. RAA 𝑝 = 5.93 × 10−5
Table 6 Overall, the ablation results confirm that all three components are
Ablation study of SEA on FinMR, FAMMA, MMMU-Finance, using beneficial, while their contributions are not equally strong. Iterative
base model Claude-4-5-Sonnet. agent communication produces the largest performance gain, suggesting
Method FinMR% FAMMA% MMMU% that coordination among agents is central to SEA. Direct planner access
to visual input is also important, particularly for tasks requiring precise
Full SEA 78.49 64.50 82.70
w/o Planner 63.79 60.00 65.30
visual grounding. Specialized evidence-seeking agents further improve
w/o Agent Communication 64.69 61.00 73.21 performance by supporting targeted information acquisition from het-
w/o Evidence Seeking Agents 72.19 62.30 78.22 erogeneous sources. The full SEA system, therefore, achieves the best
results on FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance, demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed multi-agent reasoning framework.
cialized evidence acquisition jointly affect performance on financial 5.3. Utility analysis of dynamic sub-task generation
multimodal reasoning.
SEA w/o Planner. In the full framework, the planning agent decom- We compare dynamic sub-task generation with a static decomposi-
poses the task into step-wise sub-tasks and generates targeted queries to tion strategy on the FinMR dataset, where all sub-tasks are predefined
guide evidence acquisition at each reasoning step. In this variant, we re- at the beginning and remain fixed throughout the reasoning process.
move the planning agent entirely. Instead, each evidence-seeking agent As illustrated in Fig. 3, dynamic sub-task generation consistently out-
operates based on a fixed, generic instruction (i.e., understanding the im- performs static decomposition across all base models. In particular, the
age, context, and question to extract relevant evidence, or retrieving knowl-
performance gains are substantial for Gemini-2.5-Flash (+9.43%) and
edge from a financial knowledge base), without step-specific guidance. noticeable for GPT-4o (+3.93%), indicating that the benefit of dynamic
The collected evidence is then directly used by the reasoning agent. As planning is robust across models of varying capabilities.
shown in Table 6, this variant achieves performance slightly better than The performance improvement stems from the adaptive nature of dy-
standard CoT reasoning in Table 4, but remains significantly inferior to namic planning. In static decomposition, the reasoning trajectory is de-
the full SEA framework. This observation highlights that while evidence- termined without access to intermediate evidence, making it vulnerable
seeking agents are beneficial, their effectiveness critically depends on to early-stage planning errors that cannot be corrected later. This lim-
fine-grained, step-conditioned guidance. Without an explicit planning itation is especially pronounced in FinMR, where relevant information
mechanism, evidence retrieval becomes coarse and less aligned with the is often fragmented across textual context, visual inputs, and domain-
evolving reasoning needs, leading to suboptimal downstream reasoning specific knowledge, requiring flexible and iterative reasoning. In con-
performance. trast, dynamic sub-task generation enables the planner to iteratively up-
SEA w/o Agent Communication. In this variant, we remove the date subsequent sub-tasks conditioned on the evolving evidence state.
iterative communication mechanism among the planning agent, the This allows the system to refine reasoning objectives based on newly
evidence-seeking agents, and the reasoning agent. The planner gener- acquired evidence, correct earlier misinterpretations, and focus on the
ates the reasoning plan and queries only once, the evidence-seeking most relevant information at each step. As reflected in Fig. 3, this adap-
agents retrieve information in a single pass, and the reasoning agent tive process leads to consistent and sometimes large performance im-
produces the final answer from the collected evidence. Compared with provements across all evaluated models.
the full SEA system, this variant yields the largest overall degradation,
dropping to 64.69% on FinMR, 61.00% on FAMMA, and 73.21% on 5.4. Utility analysis of evidence acquisition
MMMU-Finance. These results indicate that iterative multi-agent com-
munication substantially improves the quality of intermediate evidence To evaluate the quality of evidence acquired by different agents, we
and enables more effective coordination between planning, evidence conduct a fine-grained analysis on the FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-
collection, and reasoning. Finance benchmarks.
SEA w/o Evidence-Seeking Agents. To evaluate the importance of
targeted evidence acquisition, we remove the evidence-seeking agents Case-based Analysis. For each dataset, we randomly sample 100 inter-
and retain only the planner and reasoning agent. Under this setting, the mediate queries generated during the reasoning process and assess the
system can no longer extract evidence from different sources through correctness of the corresponding agent responses. We adopt different
specialized agents. Performance again declines across all datasets, reach- evaluation strategies tailored to each modality. For the image agent, cor-
ing 72.19% on FinMR, 62.30% on FAMMA, and 78.22% on MMMU- rectness is assessed via human evaluation due to the complexity of visual
Finance. Although this variant remains stronger than the settings with- interpretation. For the context agent, we use GPT-5 to judge whether the
out planner vision input or agent communication, it is still consis- generated answers are correct given the query and context, following
tently worse than the full SEA system, showing that dedicated evidence- prior work on LLM-based evaluation [46,47]. For the knowledge agent,
seeking agents contribute meaningfully to accurate financial multimodal we compare its responses with ground-truth explanations provided in
reasoning. the datasets, and employ an LLM to determine correctness.
9


===== PAGE 10 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
dence, image evidence, and textual-context evidence at ratios of 0%,
25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%, and then evaluate the resulting final rea-
soning accuracy. This controlled setting allows us to quantify how the
completeness of different evidence types affects the final answer. To
provide a more statistically reliable assessment, we further report 95%
Wilson confidence intervals for each accuracy value, which are visual-
ized as error bars in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5, accuracy generally decreases as the evidence drop
ratio increases across all three benchmarks, indicating that intermedi-
ate evidence directly supports the final reasoning process. On FinMR,
the accuracy drops from 78.49% to 74.23%, 73.86%, and 73.24% when
knowledge, textual-context, and image evidence are fully removed, re-
spectively. The largest degradation comes from removing image evi-
dence, suggesting that visual grounding is particularly important for
Fig. 3. Static vs. dynamic task decomposition on the FinMR benchmark. Dy- FinMR. On FAMMA, the performance decreases from 64.50% to 63.25%,
namic sub-task generation consistently outperforms static planning across all
63.08%, and 63.40% under full removal of knowledge, image, and
models, highlighting the effectiveness of iterative, evidence-conditioned task
refinement.
textual-context evidence, respectively. Although the absolute drops are
smaller, the consistent downward trend shows that all three evidence
types contribute to the final prediction. On MMMU-Finance, accuracy
decreases from 82.70% to 79.58%, 79.33%, and 79.75% when knowl-
edge, image, and textual-context evidence are fully removed, respec-
tively, again showing that both multimodal evidence and financial
knowledge are important for reliable reasoning.
Overall, these perturbation results, together with the reported confi-
dence intervals, provide direct empirical evidence that SEA’s effective-
ness is closely tied to the completeness of intermediate evidence. The
performance degradation under increasing drop ratios confirms the util-
ity and quality of the intermediate evidence: if the acquired evidence
were mostly noisy, redundant, or weakly related to the reasoning task,
removing a larger portion of it would not lead to a consistent decline in
performance. Instead, the observed degradation suggests that SEA col-
lects evidence that contributes positively to reasoning by constraining
candidate answers, and supporting intermediate decisions. Last but not
Fig. 4. Evidence quality of different agents on FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU- least, since only one evidence type is removed at a time, the remaining
Finance. Context and knowledge agents achieve consistently high accuracy,
evidence sources can still partially compensate for the missing modality,
while the image agent shows relatively lower performance due to the challenges
highlighting the complementary nature of SEA’s multi-agent evidence
of fine-grained visual understanding.
acquisition mechanism.
Fig. 4 indicates that all three agents produce high-quality evidence 5.5. Utility analysis of query-based agent communication
overall, while exhibiting distinct characteristics across modalities. The
context agent achieves consistently strong performance across datasets To evaluate the effectiveness of different collaboration mechanisms,
(e.g., 95% on FinMR), indicating its reliability in extracting and reason- we compare four representative paradigms: 1) pipeline-based collab-
ing over textual context. The knowledge agent also performs robustly oration, where agents operate sequentially without interaction; 2)
(up to 93% on MMMU-Finance), demonstrating its effectiveness in re- controller-based coordination, where a central planner assigns subtasks
trieving and applying domain-specific financial knowledge. In contrast, to different modules without explicit query–response communication;
the image agent shows comparatively lower accuracy (e.g., 63% on 3) debate-based collaboration, where agents engage in multi-round ad-
FAMMA), reflecting the inherent difficulty of fine-grained visual percep- versarial discussions; and 4) our query-driven interactive collaboration,
tion in financial charts and tables. Nevertheless, its performance remains which enables structured query–response communication between the
reasonably strong (75% on FinMR), suggesting that it still provides use- planner and evidence-seeking agents. For a fair comparison, all com-
ful complementary evidence, particularly when visual information is es- munication baselines are implemented using the same backbone model,
sential. the same input context. The pipeline-based baseline follows a sequen-
The differences across agents highlight an important insight: ev- tial evidence-retrieval-and-reasoning process, similar to role-aware fi-
idence quality is modality-dependent, and errors in multimodal rea- nancial agents [18]. The controller-based baseline follows the central-
soning often originate from weaker perception modules. This obser- ized coordination paradigm of AutoGen-style systems [19], where a
vation further justifies the design of SEA, where multiple specialized controller assigns subtasks to specialized agents but does not use ex-
agents collaboratively contribute evidence, allowing stronger modali- plicit query–response evidence acquisition. The debate-based baseline
ties (e.g., the context and knowledge agents) to compensate for weaker follows multi-agent debate protocols [20], where multiple agents inde-
ones (e.g., the image agent). Overall, these results demonstrate that SEA pendently generate answers and exchange critiques before producing a
can reliably acquire high-quality intermediate evidence across modali- final decision. In contrast, SEA uses planner-generated, step-conditioned
ties, which serves as a critical foundation for improving downstream queries to explicitly acquire missing evidence from the most relevant
reasoning performance. agent at each reasoning step.
As shown in Table 7, query-driven interaction consistently outper-
Evidence Perturbation Analysis. To further examine how intermediate forms all other collaboration paradigms across all benchmarks. On
evidence quality affects final reasoning outcomes, we conduct an evi- FinMR, our method achieves 78.49% accuracy, significantly surpass-
dence perturbation analysis using Claude-4-5-Sonnet as the backbone ing pipeline-based (+8.18%), controller-based (+11.05%), and debate-
model. For each benchmark, we independently drop knowledge evi- based (+6.16%) collaboration. Similar improvements are observed on
10


===== PAGE 11 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Table 7 sults demonstrate that not all forms of interaction are equally effective.
Comparison with representative multi-agent communication paradigms. All Instead of no interaction (pipeline), implicit task delegation (controller-
methods are implemented using the same backbone model and input setting based), or excessive interaction (debate), minimal yet targeted query-
for fair comparison. The results show that the proposed query-based communi-
based communication provides the most suitable balance between effi-
cation paradigm consistently outperforms pipeline-based, controller-based, and
ciency and reasoning accuracy for multimodal financial tasks.
debate-based alternatives across all three benchmarks.
Communication Method FinMR FAMMA MMMU-Finance
5.6. Error analysis
Pipeline-based: Role-aware Agent [18] 70.31 60.33 67.66
Controller-based: AutoGen-style [19] 67.44 56.78 65.59 Although SEA achieves strong performance on FinMR and MMMU-
Debate-based: Multi-agent Debate [20] 72.33 57.32 70.69
Finance, we observe relatively lower accuracy on the FAMMA bench-
Query-based: SEA (ours) 78.49 64.50 82.70
mark. To examine the limitations of our system on the bench-
mark, FAMMA, we conduct a detailed error analysis. Following prior
FAMMA and MMMU-Finance, where query-driven interaction yields the works [48–50], we randomly sampled 100 error cases from the FAMMA
best performance, with particularly notable gains on MMMU-Finance dataset. Fig. 6 demonstrates the error distribution intuitively. The errors
(+17.11% over controller-based and +15.04% over pipeline-based). were categorized as follows:
The results reveal several important insights. First, purely sequen- Cross-Image Reasoning Errors (46%): The largest portion of errors
tial collaboration is insufficient for complex multimodal financial rea- occurs in one question with multiple charts or tables. These questions
soning. Pipeline-based methods lack the ability to dynamically acquire require the model to extract numerical information from several visual
missing information, leading to incomplete or incorrect intermediate ev- sources and aggregate them correctly. In many cases, the system fails
idence. This limitation is especially pronounced in tasks requiring cross- to accurately combine information across different charts, leading to
modal integration and domain knowledge. Second, controller-based co- incorrect intermediate values and final answers.
ordination, despite introducing task routing, remains limited in its abil- Text-Image Alignment Errors (23%): Another common error arises
ity to support evidence-grounded reasoning. Although the planner can when questions contain long textual contexts accompanied by images.
decide which module to invoke, it delegates entire subtasks rather than In such cases, the model sometimes struggles to properly align textual
explicitly identifying and retrieving missing information. As a result, descriptions with relevant visual elements. As a result, important in-
the reasoning process remains implicit, and the system may fail to ob- formation from either the text or the image may be overlooked during
tain the precise evidence required for accurate decision-making. Third, reasoning.
while debate-based collaboration introduces stronger interaction, un- Scenario-Specific Knowledge Errors (10%): We also observe errors
structured or adversarial communication does not necessarily improve related to financial knowledge application. Although the system can re-
reasoning performance. The relatively lower performance on FAMMA trieve general financial formulas or concepts, some questions require
suggests that multi-round discussions may introduce redundancy or dis- adapting these formulas to specific financial scenarios. In these cases,
tract from the core task, without effectively addressing missing evi- the model occasionally applies standard formulas without correctly ac-
dence. Moreover, debate-based methods incur higher communication counting for contextual assumptions, leading to reasoning mistakes.
overhead without guaranteeing more accurate information acquisition. Others (21%): The remaining errors include numerical calculation
In contrast, our query-driven framework achieves the best perfor- mistakes and occasional reasoning inconsistencies.
mance by enabling targeted and efficient evidence acquisition. At each Beyond the above empirical categories, these errors also reveal sev-
step, the planner explicitly identifies missing information and formu- eral component-level limitations of SEA. First, the framework depends
lates task-specific queries to retrieve evidence from the most relevant on the quality of planner-generated subtasks. When a question requires
agent. This structured communication paradigm avoids both the rigid- integrating multiple charts, tables, or textual constraints, an incom-
ity of pipeline-based execution and the inefficiency of open-ended de- plete subtask decomposition may cause the system to overlook necessary
bate, while overcoming the implicit reasoning limitations of controller- evidence. Second, although evidence-seeking agents improve modular-
based coordination. As a result, it leads to more accurate intermediate ity, they may still return incomplete, or partially misaligned evidence,
evidence and, consequently, more reliable final predictions. These re- especially when long textual contexts must be matched with specific
Fig. 5. Evidence perturbation analysis under different evidence drop ratios on three benchmarks. (a) FinMR, (b) FAMMA, and (c) MMMU-Finance. For each bench-
mark, we progressively drop knowledge, image, and context evidence from 0% to 100% and report the corresponding reasoning accuracy. Error bars indicate 95%
Wilson confidence intervals.
11


===== PAGE 12 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
Rui Mao is supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore un-
der its MOE Academic Research Fund Tier 2 (STEM RIE2025 Award
Fig. 6. Error distribution in FAMMA. MOE-T2EP20123-0005) and by the RIE2025 Industry Alignment Fund -
Industry Collaboration Projects (IAF-ICP) (Award I2301E0026), admin-
visual elements. Third, the current framework does not explicitly re- istered by A*STAR, as well as supported by Alibaba Group and NTU
solve conflicts among evidence returned by different agents. As a result, Singapore.
contradictory or insufficient evidence may propagate to the reasoning
agent and lead to incorrect intermediate reasoning. Finally, although the Data availability
Knowledge Agent can retrieve general financial concepts and formulas,
some questions require adapting these principles to scenario-specific as- Data will be made available on request.
sumptions, which remains challenging. These limitations suggest that
future work should incorporate planner verification, cross-source evi- Appendix A. Summary of notations
dence consistency checking, and more robust mechanisms for aggregat-
ing evidence across multiple visual and textual sources. The main notations of this work can be viewed in Table A.8.
6. Conclusion Table A.8
Summary of the main notations used in the SEA framework.
In this work, we present SEA, a multi-agent framework for mul-
Notation Description
timodal financial reasoning that explicitly models the interaction be-
𝑋 A multimodal financial reasoning instance.
tween task decomposition, evidence acquisition, and reasoning. By in-
𝐶 Textual context of the question.
troducing a planner-guided, query-based communication protocol, SEA 𝐼 = {𝑖
1
, … , 𝑖 𝑆} Set of visual inputs, such as charts, tables, or figures.
enables dynamic retrieval of step-conditioned evidence from heteroge- 𝑄 Financial reasoning question.
neous sources, including visual, textual, and knowledge-based inputs. 𝑂 = {𝑜 1 , … , 𝑜 𝑀} Set of candidate answer options.
𝑌 ∗ Ground-truth answer.
The key insight of SEA is that reasoning errors in multimodal financial
𝑌̂ Predicted answer.
tasks often stem from insufficient or incorrect intermediate evidence. 𝐸 Evidence state after reasoning step 𝑛.
𝑛
By maintaining an explicit evidence state and grounding each reason- 𝑒 Evidence retrieved at step 𝑛.
𝑛
ing step in retrieved information, SEA effectively improves interpretabil- 𝑒
𝑛,𝓁
Evidence returned for the 𝓁-th query at step 𝑛.
ity. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach achieves consistent 𝑅 𝑛 Reasoning trajectory after step 𝑛.
𝑟 Intermediate reasoning output at step 𝑛.
gains across multiple benchmarks, particularly in scenarios requiring
𝑡
𝑛
Sub-task generated by the planner at step 𝑛.
c
e
r
ff
o
e
s
c
s
t
-
i
m
ve
o
l
d
y
a
i
l
n
i
t
n
e
t
g
e
r
g
a
r
t
a
e
t
s
i o
p
n
e r
a
ce
n
p
d
t i
d
o
o
n
m
, k
a
n
in
o
-
w
sp
le
e
d
ci
g
fi
e
c
, a
k
n
n
d
o w
re
l
a
e
s
d
o
g
n
e
i
.
n
O
g
v
in
e r
c
a
o
ll
m
,
p
S
l
E
e
A
x
𝑞
𝑠
𝑛 𝑛 = {𝑞 𝑛,1 , … , 𝑞 𝑛,𝐿𝑛 } S
T
e
e
t
r m
of
i n
e
a
v
t
i
i
d
o
e
n
n c
fl
e
a
-
g
s e
i
e
n
k
d
i
i
n
c
g
a t
q
in
u
g
e r
w
ie
h
s
e
a
t
t
h e
st
r
e
t
p
o
𝑛
c
.
ontinue or stop.
𝑛
multimodal settings and offers a promising direction toward more reli-  𝑃 Planner agent.
 Image evidence-seeking agent.
able and interpretable financial reasoning systems. 𝐼
 Context evidence-seeking agent.
𝐶
 Knowledge evidence-seeking agent.
𝐾
7. Limitations  Reasoning agent.
𝑅
 External financial knowledge base.
While SEA demonstrates strong performance improvements, several 𝜌(⋅) Routing function that assigns each query to an evidence-
seeking agent.
limitations remain. First, the framework relies on multiple large model-
𝑁 Maximum number of reasoning/planning steps.
based agents, which introduces additional computational overhead com- max
pared to single-model approaches. Although the query-based communi-
cation protocol is simple, the iterative interaction among agents may
increase latency in real-world applications. Second, the effectiveness of Appendix B. Prompt templates for SEA
SEA depends on the quality of the evidence-seeking agents. Errors in vi-
sual perception, information extraction, or knowledge retrieval can still To improve reproducibility, we provide the prompt templates used
propagate through the system, potentially affecting downstream reason- by the agents in SEA. Each agent is instantiated with the same backbone
ing. Finally, our experiments focus on financial multimodal benchmarks, MLLM within an experiment, but is assigned a role-specific instruction.
and the generalization of SEA to other domains, such as scientific or The planner agent generates step-conditioned subtasks and evidence-
medical reasoning, remains to be further explored. seeking queries; the evidence-seeking agents return modality-specific
evidence; and the reasoning agent performs evidence-grounded infer-
CRediT authorship contribution statement
ence based on the accumulated evidence state.
Shuangyan Deng: Writing – original draft, Validation, Software,
Methodology, Conceptualization; Zihao Huang: Validation, Investiga-
tion, Data curation; Kelvin Du: Writing – review & editing, Investiga-
tion; Rui Mao: Writing – review & editing, Visualization; Jiamou Liu:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision; Ciprian Doru Giurca˘neanu:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration; Erik
Cambria: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources.
12


===== PAGE 13 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
B.1. Planner agent prompt
13


===== PAGE 14 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
B.2. Evidence-seeking agent prompts
14


===== PAGE 15 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
15


===== PAGE 16 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
B.3. Reasoning agent prompt
16


===== PAGE 17 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
References [25] K. Du, Y. Zhao, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, A retrieval-augmented multi-agent
system for financial sentiment analysis, IEEE Intell. Syst. 40 (2025) 15–22. https:
[1] Open AI, GPT-4o system card, 2024,. arXiv:2410.21276. //doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3544912
[2] G. DeepMind, Gemini 2.5 flash model card, 2025, https://deepmind.google/models/ [26] L. Xiao, R. Mao, S. Zhao, Q. Lin, Y. Jia, L. He, E. Cambria, Exploring cognitive
model-cards/. and aesthetic causality for multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis, IEEE Trans.
[3] Anthro pic, Claude Sonnet 4-5, 2025, https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-4. Affective Comput. (2025). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2025.3565506
[4] K. Du, Y. Zhao, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, Natural language processing in finance: [27] Y. Xiao, E. Sun, D. Luo, W. Wang, TradingAgents: multi-agents LLM financial trading
a survey, Inform. Fus. 115 (2025) 102755. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2024. framework, (2024). arXiv:2412.20138.
102755 [28] H. Ding, Y. Li, J. Wang, H. Chen, Large language model agent in financial trading:
[5] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, Y.J. Lee, Visual instruction tuning, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. a survey, (2024), arXiv:2408.06361.
Syst. 36 (2023) 34892–34916. https://doi.org/10.5555/3666122.3667638 [29] A. Graves, Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks, (2016).
[6] T. Yue, R. Mao, X. Shi, E. Cambria, InterARM: interpretable affective reasoning arXiv:1603.08983.
model for multimodal sarcasm detection, IEEE Trans. Affective Comput. (2026). [30] R. Schwartz, G. Stanovsky, S. Swayamdipta, J. Dodge, N.A. Smith, The Right Tool
https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2026.3653505 for the Job: matching model and instance complexities, in: D. Jurafsky, J. Chai,
[7] S. Xue, X. Li, F. Zhou, Q. Dai, Z. Chu, H. Mei, FAMMA: a benchmark for financial N. Schluter, J. Tetreault (Eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
domain multilingual multimodal question answering, arXiv:2410.04526 (2024). . sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,
[8] J. Luo, Z. Kou, L. Yang, X. Luo, J. Huang, Z. Xiao, J. Peng, C. Liu, J. Ji, X. Liu, Online, 2020, pp. 6640–6651. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.593
S. Han, M. Zhang, Y. Guo, FinMME: benchmark dataset for financial multi-modal [31] J. Janisch, T. Pevný, V. Lisý, Classification with costly features using deep rein-
reasoning evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association forcement learning, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
for Computational Linguistics, 2025, pp. 11640–11671. https://doi.org/10.18653/ gence, 33, 2019, pp. 3959–3966. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
v1/2025.acl-long.1426 v33i01.33013959
[9] S. Deng, H. Peng, J. Xu, R. Mao, C.D. Giurcaneanu, J. Liu, FinMR: a knowledge- [32] C.-H. Chang, L. Rampasek, A. Goldenberg, Dropout feature ranking for deep learning
intensive multimodal benchmark for advanced financial reasoning, in: Proceedings models, (2017) arXiv:1712.08645.
of the 6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, 2025, pp. 168–176. https: [33] V. Mnih, N. Heess, A. Graves, K. Kavukcuoglu, Recurrent models of visual attention,
//doi.org/10.1145/3768292.3770365 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 27 (2014). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
[10] Z. Chen, W. Chen, C. Smiley, S. Shah, I. Borova, D. Langdon, R. Moussa, M. Beane, 2014/hash/09c6c3783b4a70054da74f2538ed47c6-Abstract.html.
T.-H. Huang, B. Routledge, W.Y. Wang, FinQA: a dataset of numerical reasoning [34] J. Ba, V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, Multiple object recognition with visual attention,
over financial data, Proceedings EMNLP 2021 (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/ 2015, arXiv:1412.7755.
v1/2021.emnlp-main.300 [35] M. Fayyaz, S.A. Koohpayegani, F.R. Jafari, S. Sengupta, H.R.V. Joze, E. Sommerlade,
[11] Y. Sui, M. Zhou, M. Zhou, S. Han, D. Zhang, Table meets LLM: can large language H. Pirsiavash, J. Gall, Adaptive token sampling for efficient vision transformers,
models understand structured table data? A benchmark and empirical study, in: in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 396–414. https:
Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data //doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20083-0_24
Mining, 2024, pp. 645–654. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616855.3635752 [36] Y. Zhou, X. Li, Q. Wang, J. Shen, Visual in-context learning for large vision-language
[12] Z. Tang, J. Liu, Z. Yang, R. Li, Z. Rong, H. He, Z. Hao, X. Hu, K. Ji, Z. Ma, et al., Fin- models, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: aCL 2024,
MMR: make financial numerical reasoning more multimodal, comprehensive, and 2024, pp. 15890–15902. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.940
challenging, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer [37] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K.R. Narasimhan, Y. Cao, React: synergizing
Vision, 2025, pp. 3245–3257. arXiv:2508.04625. reasoning and acting in language models, in: The Eleventh International Conference
[13] E. Cambria, R. Mao, M. Chen, Z. Wang, S.-B. Ho, Seven pillars for the future of on Learning Representations, 2022, pp. 11640–11671. https://openreview.net/pdf?
artificial intelligence, IEEE Intell. Syst. 38 (6) (2023) 62–69. https://doi.org/10. id=WE_vluYUL-X.
1109/MIS.2023.3329745 [38] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Ham-
[14] R.C. Atkinson, R.M. Shiffrin, Human memory: a proposed system and its control bro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, T. Scialom, Toolformer: language mod-
processes, in: Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 2, Elsevier, 1968, pp. 89–195. els can teach themselves to use tools, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60422-3 (2023) 68539–68551. http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
[15] R. Mao, K. He, C.B. Ong, Q. Liu, E. Cambria, MetaPro 2.0: computational metaphor d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html.
processing on the effectiveness of anomalous language modeling, in: Findings of [39] H. Tran, Z. Yao, Z. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Han, F. Ouyang, H. Yu, RARE:
the Association for Computational Linguistics: aCL, Bangkok, Thailand, , 2024, pp. retrieval-augmented reasoning enhancement for large language models, in: Proceed-
9891–9908. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.590 ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
[16] M. Corbetta, G.L. Shulman, Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention (Volume 1: long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria,
in the brain, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 (3) (2002) 201–215. https://doi.org/https://doi. 2025, pp. 18305–18330. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.896
org/10.1038/nrn755 [40] M.U. Akhtar, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Liu, S. Ahmed, B. Huang, Entity alignment based on
[17] X. Yue, Y. Ni, K. Zhang, T. Zheng, R. Liu, G. Zhang, S. Stevens, D. Jiang, W. Ren, Y. relational semantics augmentation for multilingual knowledge graphs, Knowl.-Based
Sun, C. Wei, B. Yu, R. Yuan, R. Sun, M. Yin, B. Zheng, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Huang, H. Syst. 252 (2022) 109494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.109494
Sun, Y. Su, W. Chen, MMMU: a massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding [41] M.U. Akhtar, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Cui, X. Liu, B. Huang, Multilingual entity alignment
and reasoning benchmark for expert AGI, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer- by abductive knowledge reasoning on multiple knowledge graphs, Eng. Appl. Artif.
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 9556–9567. Intell. 139 (2025) 109660. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.
arXiv:2311.16502 109494
[18] A. Zhu, Y. Du, A role-aware multi-agent framework for financial education QA, in: [42] J.S. Park, J. O’Brien, C.J. Cai, M.R. Morris, P. Liang, M.S. Bernstein, Generative
Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, ICAIF ’25, agents: interactive simulacra of human behavior, in: Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA , 2025, p. 483–491. https: ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2023, pp. 1–22. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3768292.3770345 //doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606763
[19] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. [43] Y. Zhou, L. Song, J. Shen, MAM: modular multi-agent framework for multi-modal
Liu, A.H. Awadallah, R.W. White, D. Burger, C. Wang, AutoGen: enabling next-gen medical diagnosis via role-specialized collaboration, in: Findings of the Association
LLM applications via multi-agent conversations, in: First Conference on Language for Computational Linguistics: aCL 2025, Association for Computational Linguis-
Modeling, 2024, pp. 1–46. https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAakY1hNKS. tics, Vienna, Austria, 2025, pp. 25319–25333. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.
[20] T. Liang, Z. He, W. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Shi, findings-acl.1298
Z. Tu, Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through [44] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q.V. Le, D. Zhou, et al.,
multi-agent debate, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri- Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, Adv. Neural
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2024, pp. 17889–17904. Inf. Process. Syst. 35 (2022) 24824–24837. http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.992 2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html.
[21] S. Wu, O. Irsoy, S. Lu, V. Dabravolski, M. Dredze, S. Gehrmann, P. Kambadur, D. [45] L.B. Kaesberg, J. Becker, J.P. Wahle, T. Ruas, B. Gipp, Voting or consensus? decision-
Rosenberg, G. Mann, BloombergGPT: a large language model for finance, 2023, making in multi-agent debate, in: Findings of the Association for Computational
arXiv:2303.17564 Linguistics: aCL 2025, 2025, pp. 11640–11671. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.
[22] K. Du, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, Explainable stock price movement prediction findings-acl.606
using contrastive learning, in: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Confer- [46] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, C. Zhu, G-eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4
ence on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), Idaho, USA, 2024, pp. with better human alignment, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
529–537. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3679544 Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023, pp. 2511–2522. https://doi.org/10.
[23] E. Cambria, R. Mao, X. Zhang, L. Xiao, T. Shen, A. Anand, SenticNet 9: gener- 18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153
ative commonsense for emotion AI via conceptual primitive discovery and time [47] T. Yue, R. Mao, X. Shi, S. Zhan, Z. Yang, D. Zhao, QAEval: mixture of evaluators for
shift mechanism, IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 13 (3) (2026) 4086–4095. https: question-answering task evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of
//doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2026.3677113 the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2025, p. 14717–14730. https:
[24] F. Zhu, W. Lei, Y. Huang, C. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Lv, F. Feng, T.-S. Chua, TAT-QA: a //doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.716
question answering benchmark on a hybrid of tabular and textual content in finance, [48] D. Zhou, N. Schärli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schuur-
in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational mans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q.V. Le, E.H. Chi, Least-to-Most prompting
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro- enables complex reasoning in large language models, in: The Eleventh
cessing (Volume 1: long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023, pp. 1–61.
2021, pp. 3277–3287. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.254 https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM.
17


===== PAGE 18 =====

S. Deng et al. Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550
[49] J. Chen, X. Pan, D. Yu, K. Song, X. Wang, D. Yu, J. Chen, Skills-in-context: un- [50] Z. Zhang, J. Chen, D. Yang, DARG: dynamic evaluation of large language models via
locking compositionality in large language models, in: Findings of the Associa- adaptive reasoning graph, in: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural In-
tion for Computational Linguistics: eMNLP 2024, 2024, pp. 13838–13890. https: formation Processing Systems, 2024, pp. 1–39. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.812 5IFeCNA7zR.
18