

===== PAGE 1 =====

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
Full Length Article
Multi-agent SEA: step-wise evidence acquisition for multimodal ﬁnancial 
reasoning 
Shuangyan Deng
 a, Zihao Huang
 b, Kelvin Du
 b, Rui Mao
 b, Jiamou Liu
 a, 
Ciprian Doru Giurc ˘aneanu
 a,∗, Erik Cambria b
a University of Auckland, 38 Princes Street, Auckland, 1010, New Zealand
b Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798, Singapore
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Keywords:
Multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning
Multi-agent system
Large language model
 a b s t r a c t
Multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning requires integrating heterogeneous information sources, including textual con-
text, visual signals, and domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Despite recent advances, multimodal large language models 
(MLLMs) still suﬀer from perceptual errors and insuﬃcient  knowledge, leading to incorrect intermediate ev-
idence and, ultimately, unreliable reasoning outcomes. We propose SEA (Step-wise Evidence Acquisition), a 
multi-agent framework that models multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning as an iterative process of task decomposi-
tion, evidence acquisition, and reasoning. The multi-agent SEA introduces a planner agent that decomposes a 
complex question into a sequence of subtasks and generates natural-language queries under a uniﬁed communi-
cation protocol. These queries are routed to specialized evidence-seeking agents, which retrieve complementary 
evidence from visual inputs, textual context, and external ﬁnancial knowledge. The retrieved information is 
accumulated into a dynamically evolving evidence state, enabling the reasoning agent to perform step-wise, 
evidence-grounded inference. Extensive experiments on the ﬁnancial multimodal benchmarks demonstrate that 
SEA signiﬁcantly improves reasoning accuracy and robustness compared to strong baselines. Further analysis 
shows that our framework eﬀectively alleviates perception errors and enhances reasoning performance.
1.  Introduction
Recent advancements in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) 
have signiﬁcantly improved AI systems’ capacity to integrate visual and 
textual information  [1–3]. These models have demonstrated strong per-
formance across a wide range of tasks  [4], including visual question 
answering  [5], and multimodal reasoning  [6]. However, their perfor-
mance on multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning and question-answering tasks 
remains far from satisfactory  [7–9]. Financial problems often require 
precise interpretation of numerical information, domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge, and multi-step reasoning over heterogeneous inputs such as text, 
tables, and ﬁnancial charts  [10,11]. These characteristics pose signiﬁ-
cant challenges for current multimodal models.
The latest ﬁnancial benchmarks, e.g., FinMMR  [12], FAMMA  [7], 
and FinMME  [8], ﬁnd that state-of-the-art MLLMs consistently fail in 
reliable ﬁnancial reasoning. These failures are primarily attributed to 
perception errors (misreading charts), context misunderstanding (mis-
interpreting constraints), and knowledge insuﬃciency  (lacking domain 
formulas), as illustrated in Fig. 1. While diverse in origin, these issues 
∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: sden118@aucklanduni.ac.nz (S. Deng), zihao016@e.ntu.edu.sg (Z. Huang), zidong001@e.ntu.edu.sg (K. Du), rui.mao@ntu.edu.sg (R. Mao), 
jiamou.liu@auckland.ac.nz (J. Liu), c.giurcaneanu@auckland.ac.nz (C.D. Giurc ˘aneanu), cambria@ntu.edu.sg (E. Cambria).
converge on a single critical failure: the inability to acquire the correct 
intermediate evidence. Consequently, models proceed with reasoning 
based on incomplete or irrelevant information, leading to cascading er-
rors.
In contrast, human expert reasoning follows a distinct, decomposed 
pattern  [13]. Aligned with information processing theory  [14] and 
bounded rationality  [15], experts adopt a step-wise strategy to man-
age limited cognitive resources. Rather than simultaneous processing, 
they employ goal-directed attention  [16] to identify and extract task-
relevant evidence from heterogeneous sources dynamically. In this 
framework, each reasoning step determines the speciﬁc evidence re-
quired for the next, making accurate evidence acquisition the bottleneck 
for successful inference. This suggests that ﬁnancial reasoning perfor-
mance is limited less by raw logic than by the ability to retrieve precise, 
task-conditioned information during intermediate steps.
This observation raises a fundamental question: Is multimodal ﬁnan-
cial reasoning fundamentally limited by reasoning capability, or by the ability 
to acquire accurate and task-relevant evidence during intermediate steps? We 
hypothesize that the primary source of reasoning errors lies in incorrect 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inﬀus.2026.104550
Received 3 April 2026; Received in revised form 6 June 2026; Accepted 9 June 2026
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
Available online 10 June 2026 
1566-2535/© 2026 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


===== PAGE 2 =====

S. Deng et al.
Fig. 1. An illustrative example of ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning via single MLLM and SEA.
or incomplete intermediate evidence, rather than deﬁciencies in reason-
ing itself.
In this work, we are motivated to propose SEA (Step-wise Evidence 
Acquisition) for multi-agent systems to address the challenge of cascad-
ing reasoning failures caused by poor intermediate evidence quality. 
SEA explicitly models multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning as a step-wise pro-
cess of evidence acquisition and reasoning. Instead of forcing a single 
model to process all multimodal inputs in a single pass, SEA decom-
poses the reasoning process into a sequence of sub-tasks, where each 
step identiﬁes and retrieves the speciﬁc evidence required for subse-
quent inference. Speciﬁcally, a planning agent ﬁrst decomposes the task 
into sub-tasks and determines the information needed at each step. It 
then generates targeted evidence-seeking queries, which are routed to 
specialized agents responsible for extracting information from diﬀerent 
sources, including ﬁnancial images, textual context, and external ﬁnan-
cial knowledge. The retrieved evidence is accumulated in a shared evi-
dence memory and used to guide step-wise reasoning. To support collab-
oration among agents, SEA adopts a query-based communication mech-
anism that enables targeted evidence exchange among agents. Rather 
than relying on complex structured protocols, the planner issues con-
cise natural-language queries, and specialized agents return focused re-
sponses. This design mirrors how human experts solve ﬁnancial prob-
lems by asking targeted questions to obtain necessary information, re-
ducing redundant information, and improving the quality of intermedi-
ate evidence.
We evaluate our proposed multi-agent SEA on three benchmarks: 
FinMR, FAMMA, MMMU-Finance  [7,9,17]. The experimental results 
demonstrate its strong performance over the state-of-the-art baselines, 
yielding average gains by 13.68% accuracy. Furthermore, the suggested 
dynamic task decomposition strategy yields 6.14% accuracy gains on 
average, compared to the static strategy. Finally, the query-based 
communication mechanism exceeds previous methods, e.g., pipeline-
based  [18] , controller-based  [19], and debate-based  [20] mecha-
nisms, by at least 4.17%, indicating that our query-based methods can 
better align the collaboration between multi-agents, deliver evidence 
with higher utilities for the downstream reasoning.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose SEA, a multi-agent framework that explicitly models task 
decomposition, evidence acquisition, and evidence-guided reason-
ing, enabling dynamic integration of visual, textual, and knowledge-
based information.
• We introduce a query-based communication mechanism in which 
agents interact via concise, step-conditioned natural-language 
queries, enabling eﬀective and interpretable evidence exchange.
• Extensive experiments on three multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning 
benchmarks demonstrate that SEA consistently outperforms strong 
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
2 


===== PAGE 3 =====

S. Deng et al.
baselines and mitigates perception errors and knowledge insuﬃ-
ciency by improving intermediate evidence quality.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews 
related work on ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning, active information ac-
quisition, and multi-agent/tool-augmented reasoning, positioning SEA 
within existing studies. Section 3 presents the proposed SEA frame-
work, including the problem formulation, planner-guided task decom-
position, multi-source evidence acquisition, evidence-guided reasoning, 
and query-based communication protocol. Section 4 describes the exper-
imental setup, benchmark datasets, and baseline methods used for eval-
uation. Section 5 reports the main experimental results and provides 
further analyses of dynamic sub-task generation, evidence acquisition 
quality, agent communication strategies, and remaining error patterns. 
Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses future research di-
rections.
2.  Related work
2.1.  Financial multimodal reasoning
In the ﬁnancial sector, characterized by intricate decision-making 
processes, domain-speciﬁc expertise, and sophisticated analysis, LLMs 
have demonstrated substantial potential in enhancing ﬁnancial reason-
ing and analytical tasks, such as investment decision-making  [21] and 
market sentiment analysis  [4,22,23]. Recent evaluations demonstrate 
strong performance of LLMs on textual ﬁnancial reasoning datasets, in-
cluding TAT-QA  [24], and FinQA  [10]. However, real-world ﬁnancial 
reasoning rarely relies on a single textual source. Rather, it typically 
requires the integration of heterogeneous information from multiple 
sources.
Generally, ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning tasks can be categorized 
into two types: knowledge-driven reasoning and perception-driven reason-
ing. Knowledge-driven reasoning  [7,9,25] requires MLLMs to lever-
age deep ﬁnancial expertise, handle advanced ﬁnancial terminologies, 
and interpret nuanced contextual information. In contrast, perception-
driven reasoning  [8] mainly assesses visual capabilities, requiring inter-
pretation of complex ﬁnancial visual data such as charts, graphs, and ta-
bles. Despite MLLMs achieving strong performance on multimodal tasks 
across many domains  [26], their performance on ﬁnancial multimodal 
benchmarks, such as FinMR  [9], FAMMA  [7], and FinMME  [8], re-
mains weak. Knowledge-driven reasoning is limited by weak command 
of ﬁnancial expertise and implicit professional conventions. Perception-
driven reasoning is hindered by inaccurate extraction of ﬁne-grained in-
formation from dense charts and tables. As a result, MLLMs often miss 
critical knowledge, numerical details, and visual cues needed for correct 
ﬁnancial reasoning.
Beyond benchmark-oriented ﬁnancial reasoning, recent work has 
also explored LLM agents for ﬁnancial decision-making, especially 
in trading scenarios. TradingAgents simulates a real-world trading 
ﬁrm through multiple specialized agents, including fundamental ana-
lysts, sentiment analysts, technical analysts, traders, bull and bear re-
searchers, and risk managers  [27]. A recent survey further summarizes 
the architectures, data inputs, backtesting protocols, and challenges of 
LLM-based ﬁnancial trading agents  [28]. These works demonstrate the 
potential of agent-based ﬁnancial decision systems in the ﬁnancial do-
main. However, they mainly focus on market trading and portfolio ac-
tions, whereas our work studies multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning over 
charts, tables, textual contexts, and domain knowledge.
2.2.  Active information acquisition
Sequential information acquisition has been widely studied as a way 
to reduce unnecessary computation and improve decision eﬃciency.  
Early works in adaptive computation introduced dynamic inference 
mechanisms, such as adaptive computation time  [29], which allow 
neural networks to learn halting decisions during reasoning. Related ap-
proaches include early-exit Transformers  [30] and selective attention 
mechanisms that dynamically allocate computation resources. Beyond 
eﬃciency-driven  adaptive models, active feature acquisition has been 
studied under a decision-theoretic framework. Classiﬁcation with costly 
features was formulated as a reinforcement learning problem, where 
the agent sequentially decides which features to observe  [31]. Simi-
larly, sequential feature acquisition under uncertainty was proposed to 
balance accuracy and acquisition cost  [32]. These methods explicitly 
model information cost but focus primarily on tabular or static feature 
settings. In vision and multimodal domains, active perception has been 
explored through glimpse-based models  [33] and sequential attention 
mechanisms that learn where to look next  [34]. More recently, adap-
tive token selection strategies in Transformers  [35] dynamically prune 
irrelevant tokens to improve eﬃciency.
Recent studies on MLLMs also highlight the importance of selectively 
using visual information. Visual In-Context Learning improves MLLMs 
by retrieving visual demonstrations, summarizing images according to 
task intent, and composing intent-oriented demonstrations for down-
stream reasoning  [36]. This line of work suggests that multimodal rea-
soning beneﬁts from task-relevant visual information selection rather 
than indiscriminate visual encoding.
However, existing approaches typically optimize for computational 
eﬃciency,  or feature cost, or demonstration selection, rather than the 
utilities of structured reasoning. In contrast, our work frames multi-
modal ﬁnancial reasoning as a sequential information acquisition pro-
cess in which the model explicitly determines what evidence is needed 
from images, textual context, and an external ﬁnancial knowledge base, 
as well as when to stop. Instead of passively encoding all modalities, our 
system actively controls when and how evidence is retrieved, enabling 
demand-driven reasoning.
2.3.  Multi-agent and tool-augmented reasoning
Recent advancements in LLMs have shown that integrating exter-
nal tools or coordinating multiple agents can signiﬁcantly enhance rea-
soning capabilities  [37,38]. Tool-augmented frameworks such as Re-
Act  [37] interleave reasoning and acting, enabling models to query 
external environments during inference. Similarly, ToolFormer  [38] 
equips language models with the ability to decide when to invoke exter-
nal tools within a generation process. These approaches extend language 
models beyond passive text generation, allowing interaction with struc-
tured resources such as calculators, search engines, and code execution 
environments.
Retrieval-augmented reasoning further improves the factuality and 
reliability of complex reasoning by incorporating external knowledge 
into intermediate reasoning steps. For example, RARE extends a mutual 
reasoning framework with retrieval actions and a retrieval-augmented 
factuality scorer to prioritize factually grounded reasoning paths  [39]. 
Related studies on multilingual knowledge graphs also demonstrate 
that structured knowledge, relational semantics, and contextual enrich-
ment are important for knowledge-intensive reasoning and alignment 
tasks  [40,41]. These studies suggest that external knowledge sources 
can provide useful semantic and relational evidence for complex rea-
soning.
In parallel, multi-agent reasoning systems decompose complex tasks 
into specialized roles, such as planner, executor, and veriﬁer agents. 
Frameworks such as AutoGen  [19] and subsequent works  [42] coordi-
nate multiple LLM-based agents through iterative communication, en-
abling collaborative problem solving across multiple steps. Recent stud-
ies have also extended role-specialized collaboration to high-stakes mul-
timodal domains. For instance, MAM decomposes multimodal medical 
diagnosis into specialized agents, including a general practitioner, spe-
cialist team, radiologist, medical assistant, and director, demonstrating 
the eﬀectiveness of modular collaboration across text, image, audio, and 
video modalities  [43]. These systems typically rely on prompt-based 
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
3 


===== PAGE 4 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 1 
Comparison of representative techniques, including their main ideas, advantages, and limitations.
Technique Representative Works Main Idea Advantages Limitations
Multimodal CoT FinMR  [9]; 
FAMMA  [7]; 
FinMME  [8]; 
FinMMR  [12]
Evaluates models on ﬁnancial questions 
involving textual context, charts, tables, 
and domain knowledge.
Provides realistic benchmarks for 
assessing ﬁnancial expertise, numerical 
reasoning, and visual understanding.
Existing MLLMs often suﬀer from 
perception errors, weak domain 
knowledge, and insuﬃcient  
cross-modal alignment.
LLM-based ﬁnancial 
agents
TradingAgents  [27]; 
LLM trading agent 
survey  [28]
Uses multiple LLM agents to simulate 
ﬁnancial decision-making workﬂows 
such as market analysis, trading, and 
risk assessment.
Demonstrates the potential of 
role-specialized agents in ﬁnancial 
decision systems.
Mainly focuses on trading or 
portfolio actions rather than 
evidence-grounded multimodal 
ﬁnancial reasoning.
Active information 
acquisition
Adaptive computation 
time  [29]; active feature 
acquisition  [31,32]; 
active 
perception  [33,34]; 
adaptive token 
selection  [35]
Dynamically selects features, tokens, or 
visual regions to reduce unnecessary 
computation or acquisition cost.
Improves computational eﬃciency  and 
encourages selective information 
processing.
Usually optimizes eﬃciency  or 
feature cost, rather than 
task-conditioned evidence utility 
for multi-step reasoning.
Visual information 
selection
Visual In-Context 
Learning  [36]
Selects and summarizes task-relevant 
visual demonstrations or visual 
information for MLLM reasoning.
Shows that selective visual evidence 
can improve multimodal reasoning.
Focuses on demonstration 
selection or visual prompting, 
without explicit step-wise evidence 
acquisition.
Tool-augmented 
reasoning
ReAct  [37]; 
ToolFormer  [38]
Enables LLMs to interact with external 
tools such as search engines, 
calculators, or code executors.
Extends LLMs beyond passive 
generation and supports external 
knowledge or computation.
Tool use is often implicit or loosely 
controlled, and may not retrieve 
the precise evidence needed at 
each reasoning step.
Retrieval-augmented 
reasoning and 
KG-based methods
RARE  [39]; RSA  [40]; 
AKR  [41]
Incorporates external knowledge, 
retrieval actions, or structured 
relational semantics into reasoning.
Improves factual grounding and 
highlights the value of structured 
knowledge and contextual enrichment.
Usually focuses on knowledge 
retrieval, factuality, or entity 
alignment, rather than multimodal 
ﬁnancial evidence acquisition.
Multi-agent reasoning AutoGen  [19]; 
MAM  [43]; role-aware 
agents  [18]; 
debate-based 
agents  [20]
Decomposes complex tasks into 
multiple specialized agents that 
collaborate through predeﬁned roles or 
communication protocols.
Supports modular problem solving and 
role-specialized reasoning.
Existing collaboration is often 
prompt-driven, static, or 
debate-oriented, which may 
introduce redundant or misaligned 
evidence.
SEA (ours) This work Performs step-wise task decomposition, 
targeted evidence acquisition, and 
evidence-guided reasoning through 
query-based multi-agent 
communication.
Dynamically retrieves task-relevant 
evidence from visual inputs, textual 
context, and ﬁnancial knowledge, 
improving reasoning reliability and 
interpretability.
Still depends on the quality of 
planner-generated queries and 
evidence returned by specialized 
agents.
role assignment and predeﬁned communication protocols to guide agent 
interactions.
Despite their eﬀectiveness, most existing approaches remain largely 
prompt-driven and are designed for general-purpose reasoning, trad-
ing decisions, retrieval-augmented knowledge reasoning, or domain-
speciﬁc diagnosis. They do not explicitly address the challenges of mul-
timodal ﬁnancial reasoning, where accurate evidence acquisition from 
heterogeneous sources, including textual context, tables, charts, and ﬁ-
nancial knowledge, is critical. Moreover, existing frameworks often lack 
mechanisms for targeted information seeking, leading to redundant or 
misaligned evidence that propagates errors in downstream reasoning.
In contrast, our approach introduces a structured framework for ev-
idence acquisition tailored to multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning. Rather 
than relying on implicit tool usage, static demonstrations, retrieval 
alone, or loosely coordinated agent interactions, we design a simple yet 
eﬀective communication protocol that enables agents to exchange con-
cise, task-driven queries and responses iteratively. By focusing on tar-
geted information acquisition and agent communication, our framework 
improves both the relevance of evidence and the reliability of down-
stream reasoning without requiring additional model training. Table 1 
provides a comparison of representative techniques we discussed, in-
cluding their main ideas, advantages, and limitations.
3.  Methodology
3.1.  Problem formulation
We study multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning as a sequential evidence-
grounded decision problem over heterogeneous inputs. Each instance is 
deﬁned as
𝑋 = (𝐶, 𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑂), (1)
where 𝐶 denotes the textual context (e.g., the context of a question), 
𝐼 = {𝑖1, … , 𝑖𝑆 } denotes the set of visual inputs (e.g., charts, tables, or 
ﬁgures), 𝑄 is the question, and 𝑂 = {𝑜1, … , 𝑜𝑀 } is the set of candidate 
answers (options). The ground-truth answer is 𝑌 ∗ ∈ 𝑂.
Unlike conventional single-pass prediction, we model reasoning as 
an iterative process that alternates between planning, evidence acquisi-
tion, and evidence-guided reasoning. At reasoning step 𝑛, the system main-
tains: an evidence state 𝐸𝑛, which stores all retrieved evidence up to step 
𝑛; and a reasoning trajectory 𝑅𝑛, which stores all intermediate reasoning 
outputs up to step 𝑛. Formally,
𝐸𝑛 = {𝑒1, … , 𝑒|𝐸𝑛|}, 𝑅 𝑛 = {𝑟1, … , 𝑟𝑛}. (2)
The process starts from empty memory: 𝐸0 = ∅, 𝑅0 = ∅.
The goal is to predict the ﬁnal answer ̂𝑌 ∈ 𝑂 by progressively col-
lecting task-relevant evidence and conditioning each reasoning step on 
the accumulated evidence. This formulation explicitly separates what 
information is needed from how the answer is inferred, thereby reducing 
hallucination and improving interpretability. For clarity, the main nota-
tions used in the subsequent formulation and analysis are summarized 
in Table A.8 in Appendix A.
3.2.  Overview of SEA
SEA (Step-wise Evidence Acquisition) is a multi-agent framework 
that solves multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning through a closed-loop inter-
action among three functional modules:
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
4 


===== PAGE 5 =====

S. Deng et al.
Fig. 2. Overview of SEA, a multi-agent framework for step-wise evidence acquisition. The planner generates sub-task-conditioned queries under a uniﬁed commu-
nication protocol, which are routed to multi-source evidence agents (image, text, and knowledge). Retrieved evidence is accumulated into a shared evidence state 
and used by the reasoning agent for step-wise inference. The entire process forms a closed-loop interaction that tightly couples planning, evidence acquisition, and 
reasoning.
1. a planner agent 𝑃 that decomposes the problem into step-wise sub-
tasks and issues evidence-seeking queries;
2. a set of evidence-seeking agents {𝐼 , 𝐶 , 𝐾 } that retrieve evidence 
from visual inputs, textual context, and external ﬁnancial knowl-
edge, respectively;
3. a reasoning agent 𝑅 that produces intermediate reasoning condi-
tioned on the retrieved evidence including report issues of suﬃcient  
evidence.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, SEA proceeds iteratively. At each step, the 
planner determines the current sub-task, formulates a set of targeted 
natural-language queries, and decides whether the current evidence is 
suﬃcient  to stop. The queries are routed to the appropriate evidence-
seeking agents, whose outputs are integrated into the shared evidence 
state. The reasoning agent then updates the reasoning trajectory based 
on the current sub-task and accumulated evidence. The process repeats 
until the planner determines that the available evidence is suﬃcient  to 
answer the original question.
This design explicitly treats multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning as a pro-
cess of demand-driven evidence acquisition: the system does not attempt 
to process all information uniformly at once, but instead retrieves the 
speciﬁc evidence required by the current reasoning step.
3.3.  Planner-guided task decomposition
The planner agent 𝑃 controls the overall reasoning process. At step 
𝑛, given the input instance 𝑋, the previous evidence state 𝐸𝑛−1, and 
the previous reasoning trajectory 𝑅𝑛−1, the planner outputs a sub-task 
𝑡𝑛 describing the current reasoning objective; a set of natural-language 
queries 𝑞𝑛 = {𝑞𝑛,1, … , 𝑞𝑛,𝐿𝑛 } for evidence acquisition; and a termination 
ﬂag 𝑠𝑛 ∈ {continue, stop}. Formally,
(𝑡𝑛, 𝑞𝑛, 𝑠𝑛) = 𝑃 (𝑋, 𝐸𝑛−1, 𝑅𝑛−1). (3)
The sub-task 𝑡𝑛 speciﬁes the information needed to advance the rea-
soning process, such as extracting a numerical quantity from a chart, 
identifying a constraint from the context, or retrieving a domain for-
mula. The query set 𝑞𝑛 operationalizes this sub-task into concrete infor-
mation requests that can be answered by specialized agents. The termi-
nation ﬂag 𝑠𝑛 indicates whether the current evidence state is already 
suﬃcient  to answer the original question 𝑄:
𝑠𝑛 =
{
stop, if 𝑃 judges that (𝐸𝑛−1, 𝑅𝑛−1) is suﬃcient  for 𝑄,
continue, otherwise.
(4)
This formulation makes the planner adaptive rather than static. In-
stead of committing to a ﬁxed chain of sub-tasks in advance, the planner 
revises subsequent reasoning goals according to the evidence accumu-
lated so far. Such adaptive decomposition is particularly important in ﬁ-
nancial reasoning, where relevant information is often distributed across 
text, tables, charts, and external knowledge. The complete planner-agent 
prompt design is provided in Appendix B.1.
3.4.  Multi-source evidence acquisition
Given the query set 𝑞𝑛 = {𝑞𝑛,1, … , 𝑞𝑛,𝐿𝑛 } generated at step 𝑛, each 
query is routed to the most appropriate evidence-seeking agent:
𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝜌(𝑞𝑛,𝓁), 𝑎 𝑛,𝓁 ∈ {𝐼 , 𝐶 , 𝐾 }, (5)
where 𝜌(⋅) denotes the routing function. The corresponding evidence is 
then retrieved as
𝑒𝑛,𝓁 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝐼 (𝐼, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁), if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐼 ,
𝐶 (𝐶, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁), if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐶 ,
𝐾 (, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁), if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐾 ,
(6)
where  denotes the external ﬁnancial knowledge base. The evidence 
returned at step 𝑛 is collected into
𝑒𝑛 = {𝑒𝑛,1, … , 𝑒𝑛,𝐿𝑛 }, (7)
and the evidence state is updated by
𝐸𝑛 = 𝐸𝑛−1 ∪ 𝑒𝑛. (8)
The three evidence-seeking agents serve complementary roles. Im-
age agent 𝐼 extracts structured visual evidence such as values, trends, 
and relations from charts, tables, and ﬁgures. Context agent 𝐶 iden-
tiﬁes task-relevant information from the textual context, including vari-
ables, assumptions, and problem constraints. Knowledge agent 𝐾 re-
trieves ﬁnancial concepts, formulas, and domain-speciﬁc principles from 
the external knowledge base .
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
5 


===== PAGE 6 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 2 
Statistics of the constructed ﬁnancial knowledge 
database , including knowledge types and topic 
diversity.
 Number  Ratio
 Database Size  8440  –
 Knowledge Type
 Financial Concept  5698  67.51%
 Math Formula  2742  32.49%
 Topic Diversity
 Investment  1063  12.60%
 Quantitative Methods  819  9.70%
 Valuation and Risk Models  785  9.30%
 Financial Markets and Products  776  9.20%
 Financial Reporting and Analysis  701  8.30%
 Portfolio Management  684  8.10%
 Fixed Income  658  7.80%
 Credit Risk  456  5.40%
 Foundation of Risk Management  447  5.30%
 Economics  414  4.90%
 Operational Risk  346  4.10%
 Derivatives  338  4.00%
 Market Risk  329  3.90%
 Corporate Finance  329  3.90%
 Liquidity and Treasury Risk  295  3.50%
A key property of SEA is that evidence acquisition is step-conditioned. 
The system does not passively summarize all available inputs at once. 
Rather, it retrieves evidence only when demanded by the current sub-
task. This improves both the relevance and the precision of interme-
diate evidence, which is essential for reliable multi-step ﬁnancial rea-
soning. We provide the complete prompts used by the three evidence-
seeking agents in Appendix B.2. These prompts specify how the Im-
age Agent, Context Agent, and Knowledge Agent respond to planner-
generated queries by extracting visual evidence from 𝐼, textual evidence 
from 𝐶, and ﬁnancial knowledge from , respectively.
Financial knowledge base. To alleviate the domain-knowledge limita-
tions of general-purpose MLLMs, we construct an external ﬁnancial 
knowledge base  from the training sets of FinMR and FAMMA. Speciﬁ-
cally, we extract answer explanations, which often contain ﬁnancial con-
cepts, formulas, and reasoning procedures, and use an LLM to identify 
key terms together with their deﬁnitions and mathematical expressions 
across 15 ﬁnancial topics. The resulting database provides structured 
domain knowledge that supports downstream evidence retrieval. The 
statistics of  are reported in Table 2.
3.5.  Evidence-guided reasoning
After updating the evidence state, the reasoning agent 𝑅 performs 
the current inference step. At step 𝑛, it takes as input the sub-task 𝑡𝑛, the 
updated evidence state 𝐸𝑛, and the previous reasoning trajectory 𝑅𝑛−1, 
and produces an intermediate reasoning output 𝑟𝑛:
𝑟𝑛 = 𝑅(𝑡𝑛, 𝐸𝑛, 𝑅𝑛−1). (9)
The reasoning trajectory is then updated as
𝑅𝑛 = 𝑅𝑛−1 ∪ {𝑟𝑛}. (10)
The interaction between evidence acquisition and reasoning is 
tightly coupled. If the currently accumulated evidence is insuﬃcient  
(i.e., the reasoning agent reports issues as a reasoning step), the planner 
generates a new sub-task and additional queries at the next step. If the 
planner determines that the evidence is suﬃcient,  the iterative process 
terminates and the ﬁnal answer is produced:
̂𝑌 = ﬁnal
𝑃 (𝑋, 𝐸𝑁 , 𝑅𝑁 ), (11)
where 𝑁 is the ﬁnal reasoning step satisfying 𝑠𝑁 = stop.
This design ensures that the ﬁnal decision is grounded in an explicit 
evidence trail rather than implicit latent reasoning alone. Each reason-
ing step is therefore traceable to retrieved evidence, improving robust-
ness and interpretability. The implementation details of the reasoning 
agent are provided in Appendix B.3.
3.6.  Query-based communication protocol
SEA uses an eﬀective query-based communication protocol to co-
ordinate agents. Instead of relying on complex symbolic message pass-
ing or open-ended multi-agent debate, the planner communicates with 
evidence-seeking agents through concise natural-language queries. This 
design has two advantages. First, it aligns naturally with the capabil-
ities of modern LLM/MLLM agents. Second, it constrains information 
exchange to the evidence required by the current sub-task, reducing re-
dundancy and improving alignment between planning and retrieval.
The protocol operates as follows. At each step, the planner ﬁrst de-
cides whether reasoning should continue. If 𝑠𝑛 = stop, the system ter-
minates evidence acquisition and produces the ﬁnal answer using the 
accumulated evidence and reasoning history. Otherwise, the planner 
generates a query set 𝑞𝑛, each query is routed to a specialized evidence-
seeking agent, and the returned evidence is added to the shared memory 
for downstream reasoning. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete SEA 
procedure.
Algorithm 1 SEA: step-wise evidence acquisition for multimodal ﬁnan-
cial reasoning.
Require: Input instance 𝑋 = (𝐶, 𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑂), knowledge base , maximum 
number of steps 𝑁max
Ensure: Predicted answer ̂𝑌
1: Initialize  evidence state 𝐸0 ← ∅
2: Initialize  reasoning trajectory 𝑅0 ← ∅
3: for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑁max do
4: (𝑡𝑛, 𝑞𝑛, 𝑠𝑛) ← 𝑃 (𝑋, 𝐸𝑛−1, 𝑅𝑛−1)
5: if 𝑠𝑛 = stop then
6: ̂𝑌 ← ﬁnal
𝑃 (𝑋, 𝐸𝑛−1, 𝑅𝑛−1)
7: return ̂𝑌
8: end if
9: 𝑒𝑛 ← ∅
10: for each query 𝑞𝑛,𝓁 ∈ 𝑞𝑛 do
11: 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 ← 𝜌(𝑞𝑛,𝓁)
12: if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐼 then
13: 𝑒𝑛,𝓁 ← 𝐼 (𝐼, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁)
14: else if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐶 then
15: 𝑒𝑛,𝓁 ← 𝐶 (𝐶, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁)
16: else if 𝑎𝑛,𝓁 = 𝐾 then
17: 𝑒𝑛,𝓁 ← 𝐾 (, 𝑞𝑛,𝓁)
18: end if
19: 𝑒𝑛 ← 𝑒𝑛 ∪ {𝑒𝑛,𝓁}
20: end for
21: 𝐸𝑛 ← 𝐸𝑛−1 ∪ 𝑒𝑛
22: 𝑟𝑛 ← 𝑅(𝑡𝑛, 𝐸𝑛, 𝑅𝑛−1)
23: 𝑅𝑛 ← 𝑅𝑛−1 ∪ {𝑟𝑛}
24: end for
25: ̂𝑌 ← ﬁnal
𝑃 (𝑋, 𝐸𝑁max , 𝑅𝑁max )
26: return ̂𝑌
4.  Experiment
4.1.  Experimental setup
Our framework instantiates agents based on three frontier models: 
GPT-4o  [1], Gemini-2.5-Flash  [2], and Claude-4-5-Sonnet  [3]. For each 
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
6 


===== PAGE 7 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 3 
Statistics and characteristics of the evaluation datasets, including test set size, task-type distribution, main image types, knowledge level, and reasoning requirements.
 Dataset  Test Size  Math  Expertise Main Image Type Knowledge 
Level
Knowledge 
Intensive?
Numerical 
Math?
Advanced 
Math?
 FinMR  640  242 (37.8%)  398 (62.2%) Charts, tables, 
diagrams, time 
series, maps
College Yes Yes Yes
 FAMMA  200  100 (50.0%)  100 (50.0%) Charts, tables, 
diagrams
College Yes Yes Yes
 MMMU-Finance  1100  1100 (100.0%)  – Tables College Yes Yes No
experiment, all agents are instantiated using the same backbone model 
to ensure a fair comparison across diﬀerent model families. To improve 
reproducibility and reduce randomness in multi-step reasoning, we use 
deterministic decoding for all agents, with the temperature set to 0.0. 
Each agent is prompted to return structured JSON outputs, including the 
planner’s stopping decision, subtask, target agent, and evidence-seeking 
queries. The full prompt templates for all agents are provided in Ap-
pendix B.
To address the domain knowledge limitations of general-purpose 
MLLMs, we further construct an external ﬁnancial knowledge base 
using expert-annotated explanatory data. See more details of the ﬁnan-
cial knowledge base in Section 3.4. These human-annotated resources 
provide detailed explanations of ﬁnancial concepts, formulas, and ap-
plication scenarios, and therefore serve as a high-quality repository of 
external ﬁnancial expertise. The knowledge agent retrieves relevant ﬁ-
nancial concepts, formulas, and domain-speciﬁc rules from this database 
according to the query generated by the planner.
To keep the overall reasoning process computationally tractable and 
to avoid unnecessarily long planning chains, we set the maximum num-
ber of planning steps to 𝑁max = 6. At each step, the planner generates at 
most three evidence-seeking queries, corresponding to the image agent, 
context agent, and knowledge agent. Therefore, the maximum number 
of agent invocations for one sample is bounded by 1 + 𝑁max(1 + 3 + 1), 
where the three terms inside the parentheses correspond to one plan-
ner call, up to three evidence-agent calls, and one reasoning-agent call 
at each step, and the additional call denotes the ﬁnal answer genera-
tion. In practice, the reasoning process may terminate earlier once the 
planner determines that the accumulated evidence is suﬃcient.
4.2.  Benchmarks
We evaluate the proposed method on three ﬁnancial multimodal 
reasoning benchmarks: FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance. These 
benchmarks are selected because they diﬀer in domain scope, ques-
tion type, evidence dependency, and diﬃculty  level, thereby allowing 
us to evaluate whether SEA generalizes across diﬀerent ﬁnancial rea-
soning scenarios. To prevent knowledge leakage, all experiments are 
conducted on the test sets only, since the training sets of FinMR and 
FAMMA are used to construct the external ﬁnancial knowledge base. 
Table 3 summarizes the statistics and characteristics of the three testing
datasets.
FinMR  [9] is an expert-level ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning bench-
mark consisting of 3200 ﬁnancial reasoning questions. Each instance 
includes detailed textual context, one or more ﬁnancial images, can-
didate options, and expert-annotated explanations. FinMR is designed 
to evaluate professional-level ﬁnancial reasoning, covering diverse ﬁ-
nancial topics and requiring the integration of mathematical reasoning, 
domain knowledge, and visual interpretation. In our evaluation subset, 
FinMR contains both mathematical reasoning questions and ﬁnancial ex-
pertise questions. The mathematical subset mainly requires numerical 
calculation, formula application, and quantitative comparison, while the 
expertise subset focuses more on conceptual understanding, ﬁnancial in-
terpretation, and domain-speciﬁc judgment. This makes FinMR the most 
knowledge-intensive and expert-oriented benchmark in our evaluation.
FAMMA  [7] is a multilingual ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning bench-
mark designed to assess college-level and advanced ﬁnancial expertise. 
The original benchmark contains ﬁnancial question-answer pairs col-
lected from textbooks and exams, spanning multiple ﬁnance subﬁelds 
such as corporate ﬁnance, asset management, and ﬁnancial engineer-
ing. Each question is paired with one or more images, such as tables, 
charts, and diagrams, requiring models to combine textual understand-
ing, visual evidence extraction, and ﬁnancial knowledge. Compared 
with FinMR, FAMMA emphasizes multilinguality and academic ﬁnan-
cial knowledge. In our evaluation subset, FAMMA is evenly divided into 
mathematical reasoning and expertise-oriented questions, allowing us 
to test whether SEA is eﬀective across both quantitative and conceptual 
ﬁnancial reasoning.
MMMU-Finance  [17] is a ﬁnance-focused subset of the Multi-
discipline Multimodal Understanding benchmark. MMMU is designed 
to evaluate college-level multimodal understanding and deliberate rea-
soning across a wide range of academic disciplines. We use the ﬁnance-
related subset, which contains samples drawn from Finance, Economics, 
and Accounting1 Unlike FinMR and FAMMA, which are speciﬁcally con-
structed for ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning, MMMU-Finance provides a 
broader academic setting with more standardized exam-style questions. 
Notably, approximately 95% of the visual inputs in this subset are ﬁnan-
cial tables, making it especially useful for evaluating table-based numer-
ical reasoning and structured ﬁnancial information extraction.
Overall, the three benchmarks provide complementary evaluation 
settings. FinMR tests expert-level ﬁnancial reasoning with rich textual 
and visual evidence; FAMMA evaluates multilingual and college-level 
ﬁnancial reasoning across heterogeneous visual inputs; and MMMU-
Finance examines broader academic ﬁnance reasoning, with a strong 
emphasis on table-based visual evidence. Therefore, evaluating SEA on 
these datasets allows us to assess its generalization across diﬀerent levels 
of diﬃculty,  evidence sources, and ﬁnancial reasoning types.
4.3.  Baselines
The following baseline methods are compared in our experiments:
CoT  [44] is a method that instructs LLMs to generate intermediate rea-
soning steps (i.e., Let’s think step by step) before producing the ﬁnal an-
swer. It serves as a strong single-agent baseline by improving reasoning 
transparency and decomposing complex ﬁnancial problems into sequen-
tial inference steps.
MAD  [45] studies the impact of decision-making protocols in multi-
agent debate systems. Multiple agents ﬁrst generate candidate solutions 
and exchange reasoning through several discussion rounds. A prede-
ﬁned decision protocol, such as voting or consensus, is then applied to 
determine the ﬁnal answer.
RAA  [18] is a role-aware multi-agent framework for ﬁnancial question 
answering, comprising an Evidence Retriever, a CoT-based Generator, 
and an Expert Reviewer. The retriever gathers ﬁnancial knowledge, the 
generator produces an initial answer, and the reviewer reﬁnes it through 
critique and correction.
1 Economics and Accounting are closely related subﬁelds within the broader 
ﬁnancial domain and frequently appear in ﬁnancial reasoning tasks.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
7 


===== PAGE 8 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 4 
Performance comparison across three ﬁnancial multimodal reasoning benchmarks: FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance. Results are reported as accuracy (%). 
Math and Expertise denote subsets requiring quantitative reasoning and domain-speciﬁc ﬁnancial knowledge, respectively. Numbers in parentheses indicate the 
absolute improvement over the CoT baseline. Bold indicates the best result in each column.
Model Method  FinMR(Acc%)  FAMMA(Acc%)  MMMU-Finance(Acc%)
 ALL  Math(37.8%)  Expertise(62.2%)  ALL  Math(50%)  Expertise(50%)  Math
GPT-4o
 CoT  54.17  49.40  57.07  54.50  53.00  56.00  62.77
 MAD  58.31 (↑4.14)  54.39 (↑4.99)  60.70 (↑3.63)  58.5 (↑4.00)  58.00 (↑5.00)  59.00 (↑3.00)  67.00 (↑4.23)
 RAA  59.17 (↑5.00)  53.21 (↑3.81)  62.79 (↑5.72)  60.00 (↑5.50)  59.00 (↑6.00)  61.00 (↑5.00)  69.00 (↑6.23)
 SEA(ours)  62.37 (↑8.23)  56.62 (↑7.22)  65.85 (↑8.78)  63.00 (↑8.50)  61.00 (↑8.00)  65.00 (↑9.00)  74.00 (↑11.23)
Gemini-2.5-Flash
 CoT  61.20  56.79  63.88  61  58.00  64.00  63.77
 MAD  66.19 (↑4.99)  59.79 (↑3.11)  70.01 (↑6.13)  63.00 (↑2.00)  59.00 (↑1.00)  67.00 (↑3.00)  69.44 (↑5.67)
 RAA  69.42 (↑7.22)  62.44 (↑5.65)  72.06 (↑8.18)  64.50 (↑3.50)  60.00 (↑2.00)  62.00 (↑5.00)  71.23 (↑7.46)
 SEA(ours)  74.80 (↑13.60)  66.20 (↑9.41)  80.00 (↑16.12)  69.10 (↑8.10)  65.00 (↑7.00)  73.20 (↑9.20)  79.00 (↑15.23)
Claude-4-5-Sonnet
 CoT  60.89  58.59  62.28  60.00  59.00  61.00  63.78
 MAD  74.46 (↑13.58)  72.31 (↑13.72)  75.77 (↑13.49)  61.00 (↑1.00)  60.00 (↑1.00)  62.00 (↑1.00)  73.55 (↑9.77)
 RAA  71.49 (↑10.61)  70.11 (↑11.52)  72.33 (↑10.05)  61.00 (↑1.00)  59.00 (-)  63.00 (↑2.00)  78.00 (↑14.22)
 SEA(ours)  78.49 (↑17.61)  76.50 (↑17.91)  79.70 (↑17.42)  64.50 (↑4.5)  63.00 (↑4.00)  66.00 (↑5.00)  82.70 (↑18.92)
5.  Results
In this section, we evaluate SEA from multiple perspectives to under-
stand both its overall eﬀectiveness and the sources of its performance 
gains. We ﬁrst compare SEA with representative baselines on three ﬁ-
nancial multimodal reasoning benchmarks (Section 5.1), and then pro-
vide a series of analyses to examine the contribution of its key de-
sign choices (Section 5.2), dynamic sub-task generation (Section 5.3), 
evidence acquisition quality (Section 5.4), agent communication (Sec-
tion 5.5), and remaining error patterns (Section 5.6).
5.1.  Overall results
Table 4 reports the performance comparison of diﬀerent reason-
ing strategies across three multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning benchmarks: 
FinMR, FinMMA, and MMMU-Finance. Overall, our proposed SEA 
method consistently achieves the best performance across all models and 
datasets, demonstrating the eﬀectiveness of demand-driven evidence ac-
quisition for multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning.
Across all benchmarks, SEA signiﬁcantly outperforms the standard 
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) baseline. For example, on the FinMR bench-
mark, SEA improves the overall accuracy from 54.17% to 62.37% for 
GPT-4o, from 61.20% to 74.80% for Gemini-2.5-Flash, and from 60.89% 
to 78.49% for Claude-4-5-Sonnet. Notably, the improvement for Claude-
4-5-Sonnet exceeds 17 percentage points, indicating that the proposed 
framework can substantially enhance the reasoning capability of strong 
base models.
Compared with existing multi-agent reasoning methods such as 
MAD and RAA, SEA achieves consistently higher performance across 
all benchmarks. While MAD relies on multi-agent debate and RAA in-
troduces role-aware reasoning agents, both approaches still process in-
formation from a static input context. In contrast, SEA explicitly models 
evidence acquisition as a decision process, enabling the system to dynam-
ically retrieve task-relevant information from diﬀerent sources before 
performing reasoning. This design leads to more reliable intermediate 
reasoning steps and reduces error propagation during multi-step reason-
ing.
The improvement of SEA is particularly pronounced on the mathe-
matical problems of the three benchmarks, which require precise nu-
merical reasoning and formula application. For example, on the FinMR 
Math subset, SEA achieves 66.20% accuracy with Gemini-2.5-Flash and 
76.50% with Claude-4-5-Sonnet, substantially outperforming other rea-
soning strategies. This suggests that dynamically retrieving relevant for-
mulas and ﬁnancial concepts helps mitigate calculation errors and im-
proves reasoning reliability.
Another important observation is that SEA consistently improves 
performance across all evaluated base models, including GPT-4o, 
Gemini-2.5-Flash, and Claude-4-5-Sonnet. Despite the large diﬀerences 
in model architectures and capabilities, the proposed framework yields 
stable gains across FinMR, FinMMA, and MMMU. This result indicates 
that SEA is model-agnostic and can serve as a general framework for 
enhancing multimodal reasoning in ﬁnancial tasks.
To further assess the reliability of the observed improvements, we 
conduct a non-parametric statistical signiﬁcance analysis based on the 
accuracy scores reported in Table 4. Since the compared methods are 
evaluated under the same model–dataset–subset setting and the normal-
ity assumption may not hold for accuracy scores, we use non-parametric 
tests in Table 5. Speciﬁcally, each model–dataset–subset combination is 
treated as one evaluation setting, resulting in 21 paired observations 
for each method. We ﬁrst apply the Friedman test to compare whether 
there exist overall performance diﬀerences among CoT, MAD, RAA, 
and SEA. The Friedman test indicates a signiﬁcant diﬀerence among 
the compared methods, 𝜒 2
𝐹 (3) = 55 .23, 𝑝 = 6.14 × 10−12, with the signif-
icance level 𝛼 = 0.05.
We further compare the average ranks of the methods. SEA obtains 
the best average rank of 1.00, followed by RAA (2.38), MAD (2.69), 
and CoT (3.93). The Nemenyi post-hoc test shows that the rank diﬀer-
ences between SEA and the baseline methods are larger than the critical 
diﬀerence at 𝛼 = 0.05, indicating that SEA performs signiﬁcantly better 
than the compared baselines across evaluation settings. In addition, we 
perform two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests to further conﬁrm the im-
provements of SEA over CoT (𝑝 = 9.54 × 10−7); MAD (𝑝 = 5.94 × 10−5); 
and RAA (𝑝 = 5.93 × 10−5). These results suggest that the performance 
gains of SEA are statistically signiﬁcant under the model–dataset–subset 
setting rather than being driven by isolated cases.
Overall, the results demonstrate that explicitly separating informa-
tion acquisition from reasoning is crucial for solving complex multimodal 
ﬁnancial problems. By dynamically retrieving task-relevant evidence be-
fore reasoning, SEA signiﬁcantly improves both reasoning accuracy and 
robustness compared with existing prompting-based and multi-agent ap-
proaches.
5.2.  Ablation study
To quantify the contribution of each component in SEA, we con-
duct ablation studies by systematically removing key modules from the 
full framework. Since the full SEA system built on Claude-4-5-Sonnet 
achieves the strongest overall performance in Table 4, we use this model 
as the base for all ablation experiments. These analyses are intended to 
examine how visual grounding, multi-agent communication, and spe-
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
8 


===== PAGE 9 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 5 
Statistical signiﬁcance analysis across 21 model–dataset–subset evaluation settings. The 
signiﬁcance level is set to 𝛼 = 0.05.
 Statistical Test  Comparison  Result
 Friedman test  CoT vs. MAD vs. RAA vs. SEA 𝜒 2
𝐹 (3) = 55 .23, 𝑝 = 6.14 × 10−12
 Friedman average rank  SEA / RAA / MAD / CoT 1.00 / 2.38 / 2.69 / 3.93
 Nemenyi post-hoc test  SEA vs. all baselines  Signiﬁcant at 𝛼 = 0.05
 Wilcoxon signed-rank test  SEA vs. CoT 𝑝 = 9.54 × 10−7
 Wilcoxon signed-rank test  SEA vs. MAD 𝑝 = 5.94 × 10−5
 Wilcoxon signed-rank test  SEA vs. RAA 𝑝 = 5.93 × 10−5
Table 6 
Ablation study of SEA on FinMR, FAMMA, MMMU-Finance, using 
base model Claude-4-5-Sonnet.
 Method  FinMR%  FAMMA%  MMMU%
 Full SEA  78.49  64.50  82.70
 w/o Planner  63.79  60.00  65.30
 w/o Agent Communication  64.69  61.00  73.21
 w/o Evidence Seeking Agents  72.19  62.30  78.22
cialized evidence acquisition jointly aﬀect performance on ﬁnancial 
multimodal reasoning.
SEA w/o Planner. In the full framework, the planning agent decom-
poses the task into step-wise sub-tasks and generates targeted queries to 
guide evidence acquisition at each reasoning step. In this variant, we re-
move the planning agent entirely. Instead, each evidence-seeking agent 
operates based on a ﬁxed, generic instruction (i.e., understanding the im-
age, context, and question to extract relevant evidence, or retrieving knowl-
edge from a ﬁnancial knowledge base), without step-speciﬁc guidance. 
The collected evidence is then directly used by the reasoning agent. As 
shown in Table 6, this variant achieves performance slightly better than 
standard CoT reasoning in Table 4, but remains signiﬁcantly inferior to 
the full SEA framework. This observation highlights that while evidence-
seeking agents are beneﬁcial, their eﬀectiveness critically depends on 
ﬁne-grained, step-conditioned guidance. Without an explicit planning 
mechanism, evidence retrieval becomes coarse and less aligned with the 
evolving reasoning needs, leading to suboptimal downstream reasoning 
performance.
SEA w/o Agent Communication. In this variant, we remove the 
iterative communication mechanism among the planning agent, the 
evidence-seeking agents, and the reasoning agent. The planner gener-
ates the reasoning plan and queries only once, the evidence-seeking 
agents retrieve information in a single pass, and the reasoning agent 
produces the ﬁnal answer from the collected evidence. Compared with 
the full SEA system, this variant yields the largest overall degradation, 
dropping to 64.69% on FinMR, 61.00% on FAMMA, and 73.21% on 
MMMU-Finance. These results indicate that iterative multi-agent com-
munication substantially improves the quality of intermediate evidence 
and enables more eﬀective coordination between planning, evidence 
collection, and reasoning.
SEA w/o Evidence-Seeking Agents. To evaluate the importance of 
targeted evidence acquisition, we remove the evidence-seeking agents 
and retain only the planner and reasoning agent. Under this setting, the 
system can no longer extract evidence from diﬀerent sources through 
specialized agents. Performance again declines across all datasets, reach-
ing 72.19% on FinMR, 62.30% on FAMMA, and 78.22% on MMMU-
Finance. Although this variant remains stronger than the settings with-
out planner vision input or agent communication, it is still consis-
tently worse than the full SEA system, showing that dedicated evidence-
seeking agents contribute meaningfully to accurate ﬁnancial multimodal 
reasoning.
Overall, the ablation results conﬁrm that all three components are 
beneﬁcial, while their contributions are not equally strong. Iterative 
agent communication produces the largest performance gain, suggesting 
that coordination among agents is central to SEA. Direct planner access 
to visual input is also important, particularly for tasks requiring precise 
visual grounding. Specialized evidence-seeking agents further improve 
performance by supporting targeted information acquisition from het-
erogeneous sources. The full SEA system, therefore, achieves the best 
results on FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-Finance, demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed multi-agent reasoning framework.
5.3.  Utility analysis of dynamic sub-task generation
We compare dynamic sub-task generation with a static decomposi-
tion strategy on the FinMR dataset, where all sub-tasks are predeﬁned 
at the beginning and remain ﬁxed throughout the reasoning process. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3, dynamic sub-task generation consistently out-
performs static decomposition across all base models. In particular, the 
performance gains are substantial for Gemini-2.5-Flash (+9.43%) and 
noticeable for GPT-4o (+3.93%), indicating that the beneﬁt of dynamic 
planning is robust across models of varying capabilities.
The performance improvement stems from the adaptive nature of dy-
namic planning. In static decomposition, the reasoning trajectory is de-
termined without access to intermediate evidence, making it vulnerable 
to early-stage planning errors that cannot be corrected later. This lim-
itation is especially pronounced in FinMR, where relevant information 
is often fragmented across textual context, visual inputs, and domain-
speciﬁc knowledge, requiring ﬂexible and iterative reasoning. In con-
trast, dynamic sub-task generation enables the planner to iteratively up-
date subsequent sub-tasks conditioned on the evolving evidence state. 
This allows the system to reﬁne reasoning objectives based on newly 
acquired evidence, correct earlier misinterpretations, and focus on the 
most relevant information at each step. As reﬂected in Fig. 3, this adap-
tive process leads to consistent and sometimes large performance im-
provements across all evaluated models.
5.4.  Utility analysis of evidence acquisition
To evaluate the quality of evidence acquired by diﬀerent agents, we 
conduct a ﬁne-grained analysis on the FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-
Finance benchmarks.
Case-based Analysis. For each dataset, we randomly sample 100 inter-
mediate queries generated during the reasoning process and assess the 
correctness of the corresponding agent responses. We adopt diﬀerent 
evaluation strategies tailored to each modality. For the image agent, cor-
rectness is assessed via human evaluation due to the complexity of visual 
interpretation. For the context agent, we use GPT-5 to judge whether the 
generated answers are correct given the query and context, following 
prior work on LLM-based evaluation  [46,47]. For the knowledge agent, 
we compare its responses with ground-truth explanations provided in 
the datasets, and employ an LLM to determine correctness.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
9 


===== PAGE 10 =====

S. Deng et al.
Fig. 3. Static vs. dynamic task decomposition on the FinMR benchmark. Dy-
namic sub-task generation consistently outperforms static planning across all 
models, highlighting the eﬀectiveness of iterative, evidence-conditioned task 
reﬁnement.
Fig. 4. Evidence quality of diﬀerent agents on FinMR, FAMMA, and MMMU-
Finance. Context and knowledge agents achieve consistently high accuracy, 
while the image agent shows relatively lower performance due to the challenges 
of ﬁne-grained visual understanding.
Fig. 4 indicates that all three agents produce high-quality evidence 
overall, while exhibiting distinct characteristics across modalities. The 
context agent achieves consistently strong performance across datasets 
(e.g., 95% on FinMR), indicating its reliability in extracting and reason-
ing over textual context. The knowledge agent also performs robustly 
(up to 93% on MMMU-Finance), demonstrating its eﬀectiveness in re-
trieving and applying domain-speciﬁc ﬁnancial knowledge. In contrast, 
the image agent shows comparatively lower accuracy (e.g., 63% on 
FAMMA), reﬂecting the inherent diﬃculty  of ﬁne-grained visual percep-
tion in ﬁnancial charts and tables. Nevertheless, its performance remains 
reasonably strong (75% on FinMR), suggesting that it still provides use-
ful complementary evidence, particularly when visual information is es-
sential.
The diﬀerences across agents highlight an important insight: ev-
idence quality is modality-dependent, and errors in multimodal rea-
soning often originate from weaker perception modules. This obser-
vation further justiﬁes the design of SEA, where multiple specialized 
agents collaboratively contribute evidence, allowing stronger modali-
ties (e.g., the context and knowledge agents) to compensate for weaker 
ones (e.g., the image agent). Overall, these results demonstrate that SEA 
can reliably acquire high-quality intermediate evidence across modali-
ties, which serves as a critical foundation for improving downstream 
reasoning performance.
Evidence Perturbation Analysis. To further examine how intermediate 
evidence quality aﬀects ﬁnal reasoning outcomes, we conduct an evi-
dence perturbation analysis using Claude-4-5-Sonnet as the backbone 
model. For each benchmark, we independently drop knowledge evi-
dence, image evidence, and textual-context evidence at ratios of 0%, 
25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%, and then evaluate the resulting ﬁnal rea-
soning accuracy. This controlled setting allows us to quantify how the 
completeness of diﬀerent evidence types aﬀects the ﬁnal answer. To 
provide a more statistically reliable assessment, we further report 95% 
Wilson conﬁdence intervals for each accuracy value, which are visual-
ized as error bars in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5, accuracy generally decreases as the evidence drop 
ratio increases across all three benchmarks, indicating that intermedi-
ate evidence directly supports the ﬁnal reasoning process. On FinMR, 
the accuracy drops from 78.49% to 74.23%, 73.86%, and 73.24% when 
knowledge, textual-context, and image evidence are fully removed, re-
spectively. The largest degradation comes from removing image evi-
dence, suggesting that visual grounding is particularly important for 
FinMR. On FAMMA, the performance decreases from 64.50% to 63.25%, 
63.08%, and 63.40% under full removal of knowledge, image, and 
textual-context evidence, respectively. Although the absolute drops are 
smaller, the consistent downward trend shows that all three evidence 
types contribute to the ﬁnal prediction. On MMMU-Finance, accuracy 
decreases from 82.70% to 79.58%, 79.33%, and 79.75% when knowl-
edge, image, and textual-context evidence are fully removed, respec-
tively, again showing that both multimodal evidence and ﬁnancial 
knowledge are important for reliable reasoning.
Overall, these perturbation results, together with the reported conﬁ-
dence intervals, provide direct empirical evidence that SEA’s eﬀective-
ness is closely tied to the completeness of intermediate evidence. The 
performance degradation under increasing drop ratios conﬁrms the util-
ity and quality of the intermediate evidence: if the acquired evidence 
were mostly noisy, redundant, or weakly related to the reasoning task, 
removing a larger portion of it would not lead to a consistent decline in 
performance. Instead, the observed degradation suggests that SEA col-
lects evidence that contributes positively to reasoning by constraining 
candidate answers, and supporting intermediate decisions. Last but not 
least, since only one evidence type is removed at a time, the remaining 
evidence sources can still partially compensate for the missing modality, 
highlighting the complementary nature of SEA’s multi-agent evidence 
acquisition mechanism.
5.5.  Utility analysis of query-based agent communication
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent collaboration mechanisms, 
we compare four representative paradigms: 1) pipeline-based collab-
oration, where agents operate sequentially without interaction; 2) 
controller-based coordination, where a central planner assigns subtasks 
to diﬀerent modules without explicit query–response communication; 
3) debate-based collaboration, where agents engage in multi-round ad-
versarial discussions; and 4) our query-driven interactive collaboration, 
which enables structured query–response communication between the 
planner and evidence-seeking agents. For a fair comparison, all com-
munication baselines are implemented using the same backbone model, 
the same input context. The pipeline-based baseline follows a sequen-
tial evidence-retrieval-and-reasoning process, similar to role-aware ﬁ-
nancial agents  [18]. The controller-based baseline follows the central-
ized coordination paradigm of AutoGen-style systems  [19], where a 
controller assigns subtasks to specialized agents but does not use ex-
plicit query–response evidence acquisition. The debate-based baseline 
follows multi-agent debate protocols  [20], where multiple agents inde-
pendently generate answers and exchange critiques before producing a 
ﬁnal decision. In contrast, SEA uses planner-generated, step-conditioned 
queries to explicitly acquire missing evidence from the most relevant 
agent at each reasoning step.
As shown in Table 7, query-driven interaction consistently outper-
forms all other collaboration paradigms across all benchmarks. On 
FinMR, our method achieves 78.49% accuracy, signiﬁcantly surpass-
ing pipeline-based (+8.18%), controller-based (+11.05%), and debate-
based (+6.16%) collaboration. Similar improvements are observed on 
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
10 


===== PAGE 11 =====

S. Deng et al.
Table 7 
Comparison with representative multi-agent communication paradigms. All 
methods are implemented using the same backbone model and input setting 
for fair comparison. The results show that the proposed query-based communi-
cation paradigm consistently outperforms pipeline-based, controller-based, and 
debate-based alternatives across all three benchmarks.
 Communication Method  FinMR  FAMMA  MMMU-Finance
 Pipeline-based: Role-aware Agent  [18]  70.31  60.33  67.66
 Controller-based: AutoGen-style  [19]  67.44  56.78  65.59
 Debate-based: Multi-agent Debate  [20]  72.33  57.32  70.69
 Query-based: SEA (ours)  78.49  64.50  82.70
FAMMA and MMMU-Finance, where query-driven interaction yields the 
best performance, with particularly notable gains on MMMU-Finance 
(+17.11% over controller-based and +15.04% over pipeline-based).
The results reveal several important insights. First, purely sequen-
tial collaboration is insuﬃcient  for complex multimodal ﬁnancial rea-
soning. Pipeline-based methods lack the ability to dynamically acquire 
missing information, leading to incomplete or incorrect intermediate ev-
idence. This limitation is especially pronounced in tasks requiring cross-
modal integration and domain knowledge. Second, controller-based co-
ordination, despite introducing task routing, remains limited in its abil-
ity to support evidence-grounded reasoning. Although the planner can 
decide which module to invoke, it delegates entire subtasks rather than 
explicitly identifying and retrieving missing information. As a result, 
the reasoning process remains implicit, and the system may fail to ob-
tain the precise evidence required for accurate decision-making. Third, 
while debate-based collaboration introduces stronger interaction, un-
structured or adversarial communication does not necessarily improve 
reasoning performance. The relatively lower performance on FAMMA 
suggests that multi-round discussions may introduce redundancy or dis-
tract from the core task, without eﬀectively addressing missing evi-
dence. Moreover, debate-based methods incur higher communication 
overhead without guaranteeing more accurate information acquisition.
In contrast, our query-driven framework achieves the best perfor-
mance by enabling targeted and eﬃcient  evidence acquisition. At each 
step, the planner explicitly identiﬁes missing information and formu-
lates task-speciﬁc queries to retrieve evidence from the most relevant 
agent. This structured communication paradigm avoids both the rigid-
ity of pipeline-based execution and the ineﬃciency  of open-ended de-
bate, while overcoming the implicit reasoning limitations of controller-
based coordination. As a result, it leads to more accurate intermediate 
evidence and, consequently, more reliable ﬁnal predictions. These re-
sults demonstrate that not all forms of interaction are equally eﬀective. 
Instead of no interaction (pipeline), implicit task delegation (controller-
based), or excessive interaction (debate), minimal yet targeted query-
based communication provides the most suitable balance between eﬃ-
ciency and reasoning accuracy for multimodal ﬁnancial tasks.
5.6.  Error analysis
Although SEA achieves strong performance on FinMR and MMMU-
Finance, we observe relatively lower accuracy on the FAMMA bench-
mark. To examine the limitations of our system on the bench-
mark, FAMMA, we conduct a detailed error analysis. Following prior 
works  [48–50], we randomly sampled 100 error cases from the FAMMA 
dataset. Fig. 6 demonstrates the error distribution intuitively. The errors 
were categorized as follows:
Cross-Image Reasoning Errors (46%): The largest portion of errors 
occurs in one question with multiple charts or tables. These questions 
require the model to extract numerical information from several visual 
sources and aggregate them correctly. In many cases, the system fails 
to accurately combine information across diﬀerent charts, leading to 
incorrect intermediate values and ﬁnal answers.
Text-Image Alignment Errors (23%): Another common error arises 
when questions contain long textual contexts accompanied by images. 
In such cases, the model sometimes struggles to properly align textual 
descriptions with relevant visual elements. As a result, important in-
formation from either the text or the image may be overlooked during 
reasoning.
Scenario-Speciﬁc Knowledge Errors (10%): We also observe errors 
related to ﬁnancial knowledge application. Although the system can re-
trieve general ﬁnancial formulas or concepts, some questions require 
adapting these formulas to speciﬁc ﬁnancial scenarios. In these cases, 
the model occasionally applies standard formulas without correctly ac-
counting for contextual assumptions, leading to reasoning mistakes.
Others (21%): The remaining errors include numerical calculation 
mistakes and occasional reasoning inconsistencies.
Beyond the above empirical categories, these errors also reveal sev-
eral component-level limitations of SEA. First, the framework depends 
on the quality of planner-generated subtasks. When a question requires 
integrating multiple charts, tables, or textual constraints, an incom-
plete subtask decomposition may cause the system to overlook necessary 
evidence. Second, although evidence-seeking agents improve modular-
ity, they may still return incomplete, or partially misaligned evidence, 
especially when long textual contexts must be matched with speciﬁc 
Fig. 5. Evidence perturbation analysis under diﬀerent evidence drop ratios on three benchmarks. (a) FinMR, (b) FAMMA, and (c) MMMU-Finance. For each bench-
mark, we progressively drop knowledge, image, and context evidence from 0% to 100% and report the corresponding reasoning accuracy. Error bars indicate 95% 
Wilson conﬁdence intervals.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
11 


===== PAGE 12 =====

S. Deng et al.
Fig. 6. Error distribution in FAMMA.
visual elements. Third, the current framework does not explicitly re-
solve conﬂicts among evidence returned by diﬀerent agents. As a result, 
contradictory or insuﬃcient  evidence may propagate to the reasoning 
agent and lead to incorrect intermediate reasoning. Finally, although the 
Knowledge Agent can retrieve general ﬁnancial concepts and formulas, 
some questions require adapting these principles to scenario-speciﬁc as-
sumptions, which remains challenging. These limitations suggest that 
future work should incorporate planner veriﬁcation, cross-source evi-
dence consistency checking, and more robust mechanisms for aggregat-
ing evidence across multiple visual and textual sources.
6.  Conclusion
In this work, we present SEA, a multi-agent framework for mul-
timodal ﬁnancial reasoning that explicitly models the interaction be-
tween task decomposition, evidence acquisition, and reasoning. By in-
troducing a planner-guided, query-based communication protocol, SEA 
enables dynamic retrieval of step-conditioned evidence from heteroge-
neous sources, including visual, textual, and knowledge-based inputs. 
The key insight of SEA is that reasoning errors in multimodal ﬁnancial 
tasks often stem from insuﬃcient  or incorrect intermediate evidence. 
By maintaining an explicit evidence state and grounding each reason-
ing step in retrieved information, SEA eﬀectively improves interpretabil-
ity. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach achieves consistent 
gains across multiple benchmarks, particularly in scenarios requiring 
cross-modal integration and domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Overall, SEA 
eﬀectively integrates perception, knowledge, and reasoning in complex 
multimodal settings and oﬀers a promising direction toward more reli-
able and interpretable ﬁnancial reasoning systems.
7.  Limitations
While SEA demonstrates strong performance improvements, several 
limitations remain. First, the framework relies on multiple large model-
based agents, which introduces additional computational overhead com-
pared to single-model approaches. Although the query-based communi-
cation protocol is simple, the iterative interaction among agents may 
increase latency in real-world applications. Second, the eﬀectiveness of 
SEA depends on the quality of the evidence-seeking agents. Errors in vi-
sual perception, information extraction, or knowledge retrieval can still 
propagate through the system, potentially aﬀecting downstream reason-
ing. Finally, our experiments focus on ﬁnancial multimodal benchmarks, 
and the generalization of SEA to other domains, such as scientiﬁc or 
medical reasoning, remains to be further explored.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shuangyan Deng: Writing – original draft, Validation, Software, 
Methodology, Conceptualization; Zihao Huang: Validation, Investiga-
tion, Data curation; Kelvin Du: Writing – review & editing, Investiga-
tion; Rui Mao: Writing – review & editing, Visualization; Jiamou Liu:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision; Ciprian Doru Giurc ˘aneanu:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration; Erik 
Cambria: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments
Rui Mao is supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore un-
der its MOE Academic Research Fund Tier 2 (STEM RIE2025 Award 
MOE-T2EP20123-0005) and by the RIE2025 Industry Alignment Fund - 
Industry Collaboration Projects (IAF-ICP) (Award I2301E0026), admin-
istered by A*STAR, as well as supported by Alibaba Group and NTU 
Singapore. 
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Appendix A.  Summary of notations
The main notations of this work can be viewed in Table A.8.
Table A.8 
Summary of the main notations used in the SEA framework.
 Notation  Description
𝑋  A multimodal ﬁnancial reasoning instance.
𝐶  Textual context of the question.
𝐼 = {𝑖1, … , 𝑖𝑆 }  Set of visual inputs, such as charts, tables, or ﬁgures.
𝑄  Financial reasoning question.
𝑂 = {𝑜1, … , 𝑜𝑀 }  Set of candidate answer options.
𝑌 ∗  Ground-truth answer.
̂𝑌  Predicted answer.
𝐸𝑛  Evidence state after reasoning step 𝑛.
𝑒𝑛  Evidence retrieved at step 𝑛.
𝑒𝑛,𝓁  Evidence returned for the 𝓁-th query at step 𝑛.
𝑅𝑛  Reasoning trajectory after step 𝑛.
𝑟𝑛  Intermediate reasoning output at step 𝑛.
𝑡𝑛  Sub-task generated by the planner at step 𝑛.
𝑞𝑛 = {𝑞𝑛,1, … , 𝑞𝑛,𝐿𝑛
}  Set of evidence-seeking queries at step 𝑛.
𝑠𝑛  Termination ﬂag indicating whether to continue or stop.
𝑃  Planner agent.
𝐼  Image evidence-seeking agent.
𝐶  Context evidence-seeking agent.
𝐾  Knowledge evidence-seeking agent.
𝑅  Reasoning agent.
  External ﬁnancial knowledge base.
𝜌(⋅)  Routing function that assigns each query to an evidence-
 seeking agent.
𝑁max  Maximum number of reasoning/planning steps.
Appendix B.  Prompt templates for SEA
To improve reproducibility, we provide the prompt templates used 
by the agents in SEA. Each agent is instantiated with the same backbone 
MLLM within an experiment, but is assigned a role-speciﬁc instruction. 
The planner agent generates step-conditioned subtasks and evidence-
seeking queries; the evidence-seeking agents return modality-speciﬁc 
evidence; and the reasoning agent performs evidence-grounded infer-
ence based on the accumulated evidence state.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
12 


===== PAGE 13 =====

S. Deng et al.
B.1.  Planner agent prompt
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
13 


===== PAGE 14 =====

S. Deng et al.
B.2.  Evidence-seeking agent prompts
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
14 


===== PAGE 15 =====

S. Deng et al.
 Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
15 


===== PAGE 16 =====

S. Deng et al.
B.3.  Reasoning agent prompt
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
16 


===== PAGE 17 =====

S. Deng et al.
References
[1] Open AI, GPT-4o system card, 2024,. arXiv:2410.21276.
[2] G. DeepMind, Gemini 2.5 ﬂash model card, 2025, https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/.
[3] Anthro pic, Claude Sonnet 4-5, 2025, https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-4.
[4] K. Du, Y. Zhao, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, Natural language processing in ﬁnance: 
a survey, Inform. Fus. 115 (2025) 102755. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inﬀus.2024.
102755
[5] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, Y.J. Lee, Visual instruction tuning, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. 
Syst. 36 (2023) 34892–34916. https://doi.org/10.5555/3666122.3667638
[6] T. Yue, R. Mao, X. Shi, E. Cambria, InterARM: interpretable aﬀective reasoning 
model for multimodal sarcasm detection, IEEE Trans. Aﬀective Comput. (2026). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2026.3653505
[7] S. Xue, X. Li, F. Zhou, Q. Dai, Z. Chu, H. Mei, FAMMA: a benchmark for ﬁnancial 
domain multilingual multimodal question answering, arXiv:2410.04526 (2024). .
[8] J. Luo, Z. Kou, L. Yang, X. Luo, J. Huang, Z. Xiao, J. Peng, C. Liu, J. Ji, X. Liu, 
S. Han, M. Zhang, Y. Guo, FinMME: benchmark dataset for ﬁnancial multi-modal 
reasoning evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 2025, pp. 11640–11671. https://doi.org/10.18653/
v1/2025.acl-long.1426
[9] S. Deng, H. Peng, J. Xu, R. Mao, C.D. Giurcaneanu, J. Liu, FinMR: a knowledge-
intensive multimodal benchmark for advanced ﬁnancial reasoning, in: Proceedings 
of the 6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, 2025, pp. 168–176. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3768292.3770365
[10] Z. Chen, W. Chen, C. Smiley, S. Shah, I. Borova, D. Langdon, R. Moussa, M. Beane, 
T.-H. Huang, B. Routledge, W.Y. Wang, FinQA: a dataset of numerical reasoning 
over ﬁnancial data, Proceedings EMNLP 2021 (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/
v1/2021.emnlp-main.300
[11] Y. Sui, M. Zhou, M. Zhou, S. Han, D. Zhang, Table meets LLM: can large language 
models understand structured table data? A benchmark and empirical study, in: 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data 
Mining, 2024, pp. 645–654. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616855.3635752
[12] Z. Tang, J. Liu, Z. Yang, R. Li, Z. Rong, H. He, Z. Hao, X. Hu, K. Ji, Z. Ma, et al., Fin-
MMR: make ﬁnancial numerical reasoning more multimodal, comprehensive, and 
challenging, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer 
Vision, 2025, pp. 3245–3257. arXiv:2508.04625.
[13] E. Cambria, R. Mao, M. Chen, Z. Wang, S.-B. Ho, Seven pillars for the future of 
artiﬁcial intelligence, IEEE Intell. Syst. 38 (6) (2023) 62–69. https://doi.org/10.
1109/MIS.2023.3329745
[14] R.C. Atkinson, R.M. Shiﬀrin, Human memory: a proposed system and its control 
processes, in: Psychology of Learning and Motivation,  2, Elsevier, 1968, pp. 89–195. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60422-3
[15] R. Mao, K. He, C.B. Ong, Q. Liu, E. Cambria, MetaPro 2.0: computational metaphor 
processing on the eﬀectiveness of anomalous language modeling, in: Findings of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics: aCL, Bangkok, Thailand, , 2024, pp. 
9891–9908. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.ﬁndings-acl.590
[16] M. Corbetta, G.L. Shulman, Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention 
in the brain, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 (3) (2002) 201–215. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrn755
[17] X. Yue, Y. Ni, K. Zhang, T. Zheng, R. Liu, G. Zhang, S. Stevens, D. Jiang, W. Ren, Y. 
Sun, C. Wei, B. Yu, R. Yuan, R. Sun, M. Yin, B. Zheng, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Huang, H. 
Sun, Y. Su, W. Chen, MMMU: a massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding 
and reasoning benchmark for expert AGI, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 9556–9567. 
arXiv:2311.16502
[18] A. Zhu, Y. Du, A role-aware multi-agent framework for ﬁnancial education QA, in: 
Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, ICAIF ’25, 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA , 2025, p. 483–491. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3768292.3770345
[19] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. 
Liu, A.H. Awadallah, R.W. White, D. Burger, C. Wang, AutoGen: enabling next-gen 
LLM applications via multi-agent conversations, in: First Conference on Language 
Modeling, 2024, pp. 1–46. https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAakY1hNKS.
[20] T. Liang, Z. He, W. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Shi, 
Z. Tu, Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through 
multi-agent debate, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2024, pp. 17889–17904. 
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.992
[21] S. Wu, O. Irsoy, S. Lu, V. Dabravolski, M. Dredze, S. Gehrmann, P. Kambadur, D. 
Rosenberg, G. Mann, BloombergGPT: a large language model for ﬁnance, 2023, 
arXiv:2303.17564
[22] K. Du, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, Explainable stock price movement prediction 
using contrastive learning, in: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Confer-
ence on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), Idaho, USA, 2024, pp. 
529–537. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3679544
[23] E. Cambria, R. Mao, X. Zhang, L. Xiao, T. Shen, A. Anand, SenticNet 9: gener-
ative commonsense for emotion AI via conceptual primitive discovery and time 
shift mechanism, IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 13 (3) (2026) 4086–4095. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2026.3677113
[24] F. Zhu, W. Lei, Y. Huang, C. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Lv, F. Feng, T.-S. Chua, TAT-QA: a 
question answering benchmark on a hybrid of tabular and textual content in ﬁnance, 
in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 
2021, pp. 3277–3287. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.254
[25] K. Du, Y. Zhao, R. Mao, F. Xing, E. Cambria, A retrieval-augmented multi-agent 
system for ﬁnancial sentiment analysis, IEEE Intell. Syst. 40 (2025) 15–22. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2025.3544912
[26] L. Xiao, R. Mao, S. Zhao, Q. Lin, Y. Jia, L. He, E. Cambria, Exploring cognitive 
and aesthetic causality for multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis, IEEE Trans. 
Aﬀective Comput. (2025). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2025.3565506
[27] Y. Xiao, E. Sun, D. Luo, W. Wang, TradingAgents: multi-agents LLM ﬁnancial trading 
framework, (2024). arXiv:2412.20138.
[28] H. Ding, Y. Li, J. Wang, H. Chen, Large language model agent in ﬁnancial trading: 
a survey, (2024), arXiv:2408.06361.
[29] A. Graves, Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks, (2016). 
arXiv:1603.08983.
[30] R. Schwartz, G. Stanovsky, S. Swayamdipta, J. Dodge, N.A. Smith, The Right Tool 
for the Job: matching model and instance complexities, in: D. Jurafsky, J. Chai, 
N. Schluter, J. Tetreault (Eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Online, 2020, pp. 6640–6651. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.593
[31] J. Janisch, T. Pevný, V. Lisý, Classiﬁcation with costly features using deep rein-
forcement learning, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence,  33, 2019, pp. 3959–3966. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
v33i01.33013959
[32] C.-H. Chang, L. Rampasek, A. Goldenberg, Dropout feature ranking for deep learning 
models, (2017) arXiv:1712.08645.
[33] V. Mnih, N. Heess, A. Graves, K. Kavukcuoglu, Recurrent models of visual attention, 
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 27 (2014). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2014/hash/09c6c3783b4a70054da74f2538ed47c6-Abstract.html.
[34] J. Ba, V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, Multiple object recognition with visual attention, 
2015, arXiv:1412.7755.
[35] M. Fayyaz, S.A. Koohpayegani, F.R. Jafari, S. Sengupta, H.R.V. Joze, E. Sommerlade, 
H. Pirsiavash, J. Gall, Adaptive token sampling for eﬃcient  vision transformers, 
in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 396–414. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20083-0_24
[36] Y. Zhou, X. Li, Q. Wang, J. Shen, Visual in-context learning for large vision-language 
models, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: aCL 2024, 
2024, pp. 15890–15902. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.ﬁndings-acl.940
[37] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K.R. Narasimhan, Y. Cao, React: synergizing 
reasoning and acting in language models, in: The Eleventh International Conference 
on Learning Representations, 2022, pp. 11640–11671. https://openreview.net/pdf?
id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[38] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Ham-
bro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, T. Scialom, Toolformer: language mod-
els can teach themselves to use tools, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 
(2023) 68539–68551. http://papers.nips.cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/2023/hash/
d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html .
[39] H. Tran, Z. Yao, Z. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Han, F. Ouyang, H. Yu, RARE: 
retrieval-augmented reasoning enhancement for large language models, in: Proceed-
ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(Volume 1: long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 
2025, pp. 18305–18330. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.896
[40] M.U. Akhtar, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Liu, S. Ahmed, B. Huang, Entity alignment based on 
relational semantics augmentation for multilingual knowledge graphs, Knowl.-Based 
Syst. 252 (2022) 109494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.109494
[41] M.U. Akhtar, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Cui, X. Liu, B. Huang, Multilingual entity alignment 
by abductive knowledge reasoning on multiple knowledge graphs, Eng. Appl. Artif. 
Intell. 139 (2025) 109660. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.
109494
[42] J.S. Park, J. O’Brien, C.J. Cai, M.R. Morris, P. Liang, M.S. Bernstein, Generative 
agents: interactive simulacra of human behavior, in: Proceedings of the 36th Annual 
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2023, pp. 1–22. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606763
[43] Y. Zhou, L. Song, J. Shen, MAM: modular multi-agent framework for multi-modal 
medical diagnosis via role-specialized collaboration, in: Findings of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics: aCL 2025, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Vienna, Austria, 2025, pp. 25319–25333. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.
ﬁndings-acl.1298
[44] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q.V. Le, D. Zhou, et al., 
Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, Adv. Neural 
Inf. Process. Syst. 35 (2022) 24824–24837. http://papers.nips.cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/
2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html .
[45] L.B. Kaesberg, J. Becker, J.P. Wahle, T. Ruas, B. Gipp, Voting or consensus? decision-
making in multi-agent debate, in: Findings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: aCL 2025, 2025, pp. 11640–11671. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.
ﬁndings-acl.606
[46] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, C. Zhu, G-eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 
with better human alignment, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023, pp. 2511–2522. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153
[47] T. Yue, R. Mao, X. Shi, S. Zhan, Z. Yang, D. Zhao, QAEval: mixture of evaluators for 
question-answering task evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2025, p. 14717–14730. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.716
[48] D. Zhou, N. Schärli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schuur-
mans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q.V. Le, E.H. Chi, Least-to-Most prompting 
enables complex reasoning in large language models, in: The Eleventh 
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023, pp. 1–61. 
https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
17 


===== PAGE 18 =====

S. Deng et al.
[49] J. Chen, X. Pan, D. Yu, K. Song, X. Wang, D. Yu, J. Chen, Skills-in-context: un-
locking compositionality in large language models, in: Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: eMNLP 2024, 2024, pp. 13838–13890. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.ﬁndings-emnlp.812
[50] Z. Zhang, J. Chen, D. Yang, DARG: dynamic evaluation of large language models via 
adaptive reasoning graph, in: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, 2024, pp. 1–39. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
5IFeCNA7zR.
Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104550 
18 